: 1773tXIV. Obserratzons on some Egyptian Mummies opened in London. By John Frederick Blumenbach, M. D. F. R. S. A(Ia dressed to Sir Joseph Banks, Bart. P. A. S. Read April lo, z794. AMONG the many instances of kindness I have experierlced during my late abode in London, of which tlle recollection can never be obliterated from my memory, I reckon and acknowledge witll gratitude, the uncommon, and to me very interesting, opportunities that were affiorded me, to operl and examine several Egyptian mummies. A fesv days after my a.rrivaln I found in the library of my 11olloured friend Dr. GARTHSHORE, F. It. S. atnong other Egyptian antiquities, a small mumtnyS not above one foot in length, of the usual form of a swathed puppet, wrapped up in COttOll bandages, painted and gilt in its front part, and inserted in a small sarcophagus of sycamore wood, in which it fitted exactly. Having expressed a vish to kllonv the contents of this figure, the Doctor was kindly pleased to permit the opening of it; svhich accordlngly took place ola the 21St of January, y92, at Ilis house, in the presence of the President and several members of the Pcoyal Society, and otller men of letters. The mummy itself lneasured 92 inches ill length, and 8 itlches in circumference at the breast, where it was of the greatest thickness. MDCCXCIV. A a Dr BLU1MENBACH'S ObservattvonsThe mask, exhibitirlg human features, was of a gypseous plastern which here and there shesved sonze signs of having once been gilt. Of the sernicimular breast-plate, oIlly some frrclgments were still extant. The lower part o-f tlle front covering svas-, as is frequently observed on laz^ge mtllnnies, ill a manller dissectecl ill regular compartmentsX and ola it were painted tile tsvo stalldillg fi gures that so often appear ol] the integtlments of tnummiesS vis. ola the rigElt side, Anubis with the dogs head, and on the left, Osiris Witil the head c)f a sparromvhawk The mumrny itself svas opened at the side. 'rhe outsnrartl i2lteguments welee gltlewd so fast UpOll each otRzer tllat it \0J9 founa necessarv to tlse a sasv: the inller olles were less adhesive I COllllted itl the whole above 20 circuluv-oltltions of these cotton bandagf s. Withirl tlwese was founI, as a kind of llucleus, a bulldle, about 8 inclles long, and full 2 inches in circumferellce, of t-he illteguments of a larger mummy, strongly lmpregllated vfitl-s a resinous sllbstcllce, uthicll rfenderetl it 11ard alad compactn aIact which appeared on tlle eelge to 11ave been shapecl into this oblong form by the paring of a knite. Pieces of tlais tnass having been put on a heated poker, ernitted a stnell perfectly similar to that of fir-rosin, or the drug called zvild incense from antIlills. 'Ithe sarcophaglls consisted of six small square boards of sy camore, fastened together with iron nails. Soon after, I found in the collection of Dr. LETTSOM, F. R. S another similar muumy, which, outwardly, perfectly resembled the above, was likewise contained ill a sarcophagus, arld differecl on some Egyptiall Mu^X^nics.9ozly irl the dinlensions, this bei] 142 i:leles lo1g alzd r 1ill c.ircumSerence at the breast. The proprietor svas likewise kinel enotlgh to suffer me to open it, which I did at his house on--tlle 2gth of Jarluary. But much as it resembled Dr. GARTI--ISHORE'S laummy externally, it was found very diSeretlt as to its contents, tTlere lDeing in it a great number of detachecl bones of tlae skeleozz of aa Ibisn which were only here ancl there indued witll rosin. This striking diffierence, no doult, rather excit-ed tllan satisfiefl my CulOiOsit;y and having hereupoll foulld in the Britisil MUseUtn rlO less than three SUC;1 dimillutive tnuinmies, which were now to me become enigmatical, (viz. two in the HA U WIILTONIAN collection of antiqllities9 both contained itl the same kilad of square woodell coffins, cli<claed vith iroJa nails9 and the tlaird in the SI.OANIAN collection), I Selt arl irresistible impulse to apply to the Presitlent of the Royal Society, as olae of the curators of the Museumn for his interference towards obtaining perluission to opell one of these three, ill order to laave at1 oppottunity for some further comparison. lnhe result of tilis application was, that at the very 1lext neeting of the curators leave was grantee:l me, in the most liberal luanller, not only to opela one of tllese little mummiesy but also to clloose amollg the four large ones that are in that noble repository,' the one tllat shollld appear to me tlae most likely to aiord some material illformatioll on the subject. I chose among the stnall olles tlle SLOANIAN, aS it seemed to Ine to dier more thatl the tszo in tlae HAMILTONIAN col .. Iection, from either that of Dr. GARTHSI1ORE or Dr. LETTSOM. The follr large mummies resembled in the main the one deposite63L in the academical museutn of Gottiilgen, wvhich I Aa e 1'80Dr. BLUMENBAC H S Observationsexamined in the summer of the year 178t. I selected, how ever, tlae one tllat appeared to di-ffer most from tlle otherss and from ours, by the very close adhesion of the bandages, from which I had reason to expect soxne difference in the inte-rior preparatioll of it tThe 18th February ^ras appointed for the openillg of these two mtlmmies at the Museum, in the presence of a numerous and respectable xneetillg. The small rnutntny was externally very similar to tllose I had operled before, except that it vvZas only 1II6Oinclles in lengtll, and 8-I2o inclaes round the breast, somewhat more com pact in the handlillg, alldS proportionably to its size, ratller heavier. On sawing it open, a resillous smell was immediately emitted, and glutinous particles of rosin adhered to the 11eated sanv, rrhis was owing to the COttOIl balldages having been froIn without impregt1ated with rosin, which was not the case with the two former ones. Oll opening it colnpletely, we found in the inside a htlnlan os bumerz, being part of the tnummy of a yollllg person, perhaps eight years olel, who llad been errlbalmed with rosinS and with it were also founcl some slareds of the original integuments likewise impregnated witla rosin. The upper elld (cpzlt) of the tone was inserted in the head, and the low-er ex tremity w-as at the feet of the little figure. Althougll vthen viewed externally nothing appearect suspi cious ill this little mulnlny, I foundb however7 on examining carefully the successive integuments, that the outward ones had some traGes of our common lint paper, vith which it seemed to have been restored and afterwards painted overO ox some Egyptian Mummies.l=781The large mummy I was permitted to examine, appeared by its stature to be that of a young person not above + years caldf but wXno had not it seemeds as yet shed all his teeth. Its outward painted integurnents were very similar to those of the Gottingen mulumy as it is figured in the IVth. 77ol. of the Comnzentat!ne3 SocietatZs Scientlaruvn. rflle batldages about tlle head were in a lnanner caked together by meatls of rosin. The skull svas inclosed in a kincl of cast of the same substance, which could witll clifficulty be removed from it. It seemed alson to Judge by its veightn to be filled wtith rosit> vvhich particularly appeared in the cavity between the palate and tlle lower jaw The rosin 11ere having been gradually punched out, not the least appearance of a tcongue was discernible; though some have asserted to have found traces of it in mummies; nor was any thing iike the little golden plate (the supposed Watl/US) to be here zuet with. rlhere were no retnains whatever of the soft fleshy parts, of skin, tentlonsS &c., in sl<ort, nothing was found but mere naked bones. he anaxillz were sensibly prorninentS but by no means so rnuch as in a true Guinea faoe; and not lllore so than is often seen vn laandsome negroes9 and not seldotu on European coun tenances. NVhat ap?eared to ule very relnarkablen and has, as far as I can learn, never yet beetl noticed is two exterior artificial ears, made of cotton cloth and rosirl,, ancl applied one on each side oi: the head. rrhat oll the right side was prominent; but the other seemed to have been $1aoved from itsproper place it was compresseel and much disfigured. The cotton bandages on the remalnderof tlae body svere-loosen not glued together and readily yielded to the pressure; of th@ hand. Dr. BLUMENSACH?S ObservationsThe great cavity of the trunk was filIed uzit]:l bundled ragsy and (lark brouTIl vegetable snouldg in W}aic1l9 howevern some pieces of rosin were here and there discovelXed. 13ut the inside of the tlzoracic cavity orz both sides of the splne3 and the snner surEace of the ossa ili?zan, were covered wltla a thick coat of rosln. No idol, or ally artificial syrnbol hatever, was found in the insicle of this mutumy. Nor did i-t contaiP-l akay thing like aIz onionf such as laave been nosr and tilen found about the parts of generatiqn, or ullder cone of the foot-soles of Inuurnies. Tlie bones of the arns lay along tlle side of the body, ln the same manner as those of the Gott;ingen muminy, arld t1ae -S?ne at LeXpzig, described by KETTNER. Whereas s11 the ¢lummy at GothaS £!escsloibed by FIERTZ8G, the two at Breslau, tllat velOe exanilaed by GRYPHIUS, another at Copenhagen, that sras dissected by BRINNICH, and a fifth wlaicll belonged-to the Royal SOciety9 allT1 llas leen described by Dr. HAD-LEY in the PXnilosophical Tralasactions, tlae arius were fourld lying across osrer t:he breast. On some of tlle bones of the arrns, for instance on the left os humerin utas found some glutinous rosila, whichU on being touched stailled tlae fingers of a dusky red greasy colour, and hafl a strong empyreulnatic alkaline taste. In tlle remainder of the body, tlle dry rosin +7vas alluost entirely covered or impregnatec3L with a salille crust, by which the tboracic vertebrz irl particular were much corroded, land which had entirely stripped the intermediate corpora vertebrarum of their periosteum. Circumst-ances did not allostr mg to make any experiments On this salt; but I have since obtained from my szorthy friend on someltgyptian Mummies.183JOHN HAWKINS, ES4. F. R. S. sonae considerable pieces of mummies svhich he hacl bouglat of a druggist at Constantinople, one of whicla vas covered and inlpregnated with a saline irocruswatioll, wakich in taste and a:3pearance svas very similar to tllat I have jtlst nosv neztiolled. Of this I dissolved a part in svater, filt;ered and evaporated the solutioil, and thus obtained a tre sorla) or mineral aakali (natrzlnzJ, which shot into very neat arud regtalar crystals. (See Tab. XVI. fig. 4.) For tlle sake of compa^isoll, I examilled -another large mutntny in tlle Ad[useum, vnicll had (llready been opened irl several places. r:Ullis svs oF a t>Xl11 grosvn person, and measured S feet , irlclles itl length. L;ke the former, it slaenved not the least trace of ally of t3ze soft parts, btlt consistEd of nothing but naked bolles. ILxcept a little roslll vfhicll stlblck fclst besveen tlle teeth this mutn-myn as far as its insidle cotllel be examined, colltailled nolle of that substanceo its thoracic clad abdoIninal carrities being entirely filiecl vitll a dark browz rnould which also occtlpied tlle svhole space ketvs7een the palate alld tile lower jaw, svllere it could easily l)e lovselled anel drawn out with the fingers. rile maxillg of this rnummy svere still le.ss prominellt than those of the forrner one. Some weeks after, viz. tlle yth lMarcll, I liad a11 opportu nity to examine one more mummy at the Honourable CHARLES GREVILLENS, F. R. S. nYhich had four years be-fore, viz. March 29, 1788, been already opened in the presellce of several curious spectators. It belorlged to JOI-IN SYMMONS, Esq. of Grosvenor house, Westminster, who svith the naost obliging readiness allowed me uncotaditionally, not only to dissect it as Dr. BLUMENBACH s Observatzonsmuch more as I should think proper, but X1SQ to select and take away whatever parts of it I shotxld think worthy of a particular investigation. It was a mumlny of a cllild about six years old, which as to its preparation, (viz. without rosin, and without the least remainlng trace of any of the soft parts), alld tlle painted semicircu1ar breast-plate, consisting of several folds of cotton clotll glued lIpOIl each otherg was rery similar to tTlose at the British Sfalseam, and the one at Gotfingen, except that the characters UpOll tllat part of tlle wtton integuluent which coverd the shanks, resembled rather more the figures of the one delilleated by Count CAYLUS5 in his Reaeil, Sc. Vol. V Tab. XXVI XXIX. Nothillg remained of the 11ead lout some pieces of the bones of the f-lce, a fesv teetll, alld the masli, wilicll still adhered to the cotton bandages. Among tlle teeth I found the incisores, which notwithstandillg the tender age of the person had llowever a vely short thick crowll, collsiderably worIl away at that edge which is vIszally sharp. 'rhis, therefore, is a new confirmation of the extraordinary plaalaomenon which I had alreacly noticed in a complete skull, and some fragmellts of jaws, in my own collection, and whicll had also been observed by 1MIDDLETON in the Cambridge mummy,+ and by BRUCKMANN in the olle that is at Cassel..* STORR has also seen something similar in a mummy that is preserved at Stuttgard. § * Decas Craniorlem, T. Tab. I. f M1 D DLETON s Miscellaneous Worlis, Vol. IV. p. IFO. X BRUCKMANN s Account ()f this Mummy. Brullswick, X782, 4to, § STORR, Proflromus Methodi 1t1z7ntmalitlnl. Tulving. I780, 4t0. P. Z4*. on some Egyptian Mamtntes. 18 If tve reflect during how lnany centtirieS3 alad tllrough what s variety of revolutions, tlle Egyptians have used the practice of mummifying their dead bodiess It will naturally occur that we are IlOt tO expect in all mumInies a similar cllaracteristic formation of the teethf any more than sve are to look for a similar characteristic national form ill their productiolls Of art. This peculiar structure of the teetll was llot obserrred in the two mummies I examilled in the British Musellln, neither does tt exist in our Gottingen mummy-. A detacTled skull of a mummy in the; Museum, prepared svith rosin, alad which bore great resemblance to the abovementic3ned in its general fortna and especially ill the narrowness of the poll, laacl unfortunately the crowns of the teeth so mucll mutilated as t:o afford no manner of lnformation concerning this circumstance. The above observation llowever appears, at all events, to be well svorth attending to, as it may hereafter prove a criterio\ for deterrnining the period at vvhich any given mummy llas been prepared. But xvhat itaterested me most in Mr. SYMMONS}S mummy was the mask, to the two sides of wllich pieces of the balldageS vith svhich the whole of the exterior integuments llad beell fastened to tlae corpse, still adllered. Tlle inner part of this mask was sycamore wood, its outside being shaped, by rzeals of a tilick coat of plaster, in bas-relief, into the form of a face, the surface of which seemed to have been staine(l wlth natural colours, which time had now considerably blended alld obscured. Having, holvvever, svith Ddr. SYMMONS'S leave, taken this mask, together svith some other very interesting pieces of his rnummyn with me to Gottingen, I there steeped it in warm water, and carefully separatecl all the parts of it. By tllis xneans WIDCJCXCIV. 13 b DZ. BLTJMENBACH s ObservationsI discovered the variousfraaldulent arttfices that had been prac tised itl the construction of this mask: the wooden part was evidently a piece of the front of the sarcophagus of the mummy of a young person; and ita order to convert its alto-relievo into the basso-relievo of the usual cotton mask of a mummy, plaster hadl been applied on each side of the nose S after which papEr had beeil iageniously Ypasted over the whole face, and lastly, this paper had been stained with the colours generally observed on mummi-es. The small SLOANIAN mummy in the Museum had probably been plepared nearly in tlle same manner. That the deception has in both cases been very industriously executed, appears from t-hisX thawt, as far as I can learrl, no one has observecl it before, althougll both these pieces have no doubt been often seerl, ancll examined ly persons conversant vvrith these matters. Sorne other suspicious cirousnstances ila the mummies I examined in London were more evident. For instance, the coffins of sycamore wood fastened together with iron nailsX in which the sulall mummies of Dr. GARTHSHORE Dr. LETTSQ.M, and Sir W. HAMILTON, were cotltained, had most probably been recently constructed of pieces of decayed sarcophagi of ancient mummies. The little SLOANIAN mummy everl lay in a box in the form of a sarcophagus, nvhich was made of a -dark-brown hard svood, totally diSerent from the sycamol^e, and manifestly of modern construction. How many other artificiaI restorations and deceptions may have been practised in the several mummies which have been brought into EuropeS svhich have never been suspectedS atld may perhaps never be detected, tnay well be admitted, w1>A;u-3tl sve consider how imperfect we are as yet in our knowledge of oX 30me Egyptia-n Mvmmzes187thw branch of Egyptian archrology, which, as a specificSpro blem few have hitherto treated witht the critical acumen-it s-eems to deserte. A11 the knowledge we have concerning tlle matlner of preZ paring mummies is deriered from two sources, YiZ. (a3 the examination of the mummies themselves; and -( b) two classical passages in HERODOTU s and DIO:E)ORUS SICULUS; STRABO and other ancient authors llaving mentioned mummies only incidentally, an(l in rrery few words. But unfortunately these two classical passages do not ill the least agree with the state of the mummies brought into Europe, which arew in general of tWQ sorts, viz. (a) the hard compact ones, wholly indued with rosin, which hence can be knocked into pieces; (b) the soft ones,^which yield to the pressure of the hand, and are prepared with very little rosin, and often none at all, zubose loose bandages may be wound offa and which contain in their cavities scarce any thing but a vegetable mould and particularly no idol whatever as far as I have bee able to learn. Tlle front part of the latter is usually covered with a painted, and, at times, gilt mask of cotton cloth v and as tlley appear more variegated than the former and have no rosin in them yielding drugs for trafficn they are brought ill muchgreater numbers, axld may be seen in many collections in Europe in a rnore perfect state than the former, though often rendered so by restor-ation. The former? on the contrary, llave for this very reason relmained most of them in the hands of druggists. Of this,-vis. the former sort, were the two in the dispensary of CRUSIUS at Breslau, which GRYPHIUS described in the year B b 2 8l)r. BLUMENBACH S ODSeRVatlOnS1662, and particularly the very valuable body of a mummtr which was capened by the apothecary HERTZOG, at Gotha, in z71S, and in which more idols, beetles, frogs (as symbols of fertility), nilonzeters, &c. were found than was ever, to the best of my knowledge, known to llave been contained ill any other muminy wlla.teser. But HERODOTUS, that very inquisiz.ive awad credfuloas hlstorian (as one of tlle most learned and judicious antiquaries ill Engiand leas lla-nel him), does not so much as mention either of t-llese sorts of mumuaies l llor does he speak of the rosin, or painted measks, aIthough he expressly describes such pairltee illtegumeIlts-oll t]ae Athiopiall mulumies. DIOD-ORUS is equally silent as to the rosln, and the painted covering; wllilst on tlle otller lland he advances soule very strange assertioils, sucll as that the skill of the embalmers exteilded so far as perfectly to preserve the lineaments of the face, although the faces of mummies of l)oth sorts be generally covered with cotton cloth to tlle thickness of nearly a nans hand.* These authors, although they have botll been in Egypt, had probably t1zeir illtelligeIlce merely from hearsay X for, oll the other laand, It would no doubt be too paradoxical to assert, tllat a11 tlae mummies NZeare now acquainted with have been made sitzce the datts of DIODORUS, and that none of those desclibed by laim and by HERODOTUS should have reached our time. Count CAYLUS rather conjectures, tllat no mtlmrnies ssrere made since the conquest of Egypt by the Romans (ab?ut tlae time of DIODORUS), but in this he is manifestly xnisteaken, since we learn from St. AUGUSTIN that so low down * Ths had already been lloticed by MIDDLETON} 1. C. on some Egyptian Mummie3.9as his own times (viz. in the first half of the fifth century) munlmies were certa-inly made in Egypt. Bllt that among the malmmies that now existS especially the hard ones, which are elltirely done over-with rosin, there cannot but be many of a much greater antIquity, will, among other proofs, appear particularly from the style of workmanship of several of the little idols contairaed in tllem. At least it may be admitted, vzithout much hesitation, that the mummies we now possess, which dier so mucll in their preparation a1l>l characteristic structure, are at least of a period includillg one tllousand years. 13ut it vere much to be wished that we mightllave certain criteria, to determzze ze1ith some accuracy the precise age of any particular mtltnmy that tnny happen to fall into our hands. Before7 howevern we can expect to obtain tllis object, the two folloxvingpia desideria rnust first be accomplished, rriz. (A) A more acctlrate determinatioll of the rarivus, so strikingly dyerent, alld yet as strikitlgly characteristic national configurations in the monuments of the Egyptian arts, together with a detertnination of the periods in wllich those monuments were produced, and the causes of their remarkable differences. (B) A very careful technical examination of the characteristic forms of the several skulls of mummies we llave hitherto met srrith7 together svit-h an acctlrate cornparison of those skulls with the lllonuments abovenlentiolled. This, at least, I consider as the surest method of solving the problem S being perstladed that, especially after what has just now beetl said of tle fraudulent restorations, it can hardly be * AVGUST. SeIm 361, (Opzr. T. Y. p. 98I.) Dr. BLUMENBACH S Observoltions19oexpected that we should be able to draw ally just inferences from the mere style, and the contents of tlle painted integuments of the mummies ve may llave opportunities to examirze. Still less can we infer aug}t from the sculpture or paintings on the sarcophagi, as to tlle corltents of the mummies sent us into Europe, MAILLET hasring about sixty or seventy years ago detectecl the fraud of the Arabs, who he says are in the practice of breaking in pieces tlle mummies cotltained in tlle cataconlbs in the more orllamented sarcophagi, for the sake of the idols they expect to find in themn of replacing them witll tolerably preserved common painted rnummies (such as I llave called soft), and thus o5ering them for sale. Tlae osteological properties whicla I have ha(l opportunities to observe in the skulls of mummies, are most of tTem lnentioned in the description of my collection of the skulls of diffierent llations above quoted, and will, I hopeS proure useful to others for further comparisons. As to the dyerent natiolaal physiognornies of the ancient Egyptiarls, I shall here advert ¢nly to svllat, in my physiological study of the varieties in the llulnan species, I have deducetl from my comparisons of these skulls with tlle artificial monuments follnd in Egypt. For I am wholly at a loss to conceive how learned !writers, not onlyl of the stamp of the -author of the Rerherches sur les Et,Syptiens ;§ but even profes:@ional antiquaries, such as WINKELMANNNVP and the author of the RecherclJes sur I9Qriglne des Arts de la Grecet could ascribe to the artificial monuments found in Egypt one common chnan T I. p. 237 t In his descriptiotl des Pierres gravees de Stosch p. IO, and in other works of his t T. I p 3t on sorne Egyptian Mumrnzes.191racter of national physiognomy, and define the same in a few lines in the most decided and peremptory manner. It appears to lue that sve must adopt at least three principal varieties in the national physiognomy of the arlcient Egyptians; wllich, like all the varieties in the human species, pre no doubt often blended together, so as to produce various shadesa but frotn which tl1e truev if I may so call it, ideal archetype may however be distinguished, by unequivocal properties, to nvhich the endless smaller deviations inindividuals may, without any forced construction, be ultirrlately recluced. These appear to me to be, 1. the Ethiopian cast, 2. the one approachillg to the Hineloo, and, . the mixed, partaking in a mallner of both the former. The first is chiefly distinguished by the prominent maxzll, turgid lips, broad flat nose, and protruding eye-balls, such as VOLNEY finds tlle Copts at present;* sllch, according towhis description, ancl the best figures given by NORDEN, is the coulatenance of the Sphinx; such were, according to the well known passage in SIERODOTUS on the origirl of the Colchians9 everl the Egyptiarls of his time a and thlWls hath Luc IAN likewise represented a young Egyptian at Rome.t ( See Tab. XY I . fig. 1. ) The secorld, or the Hindoo castJ differs toto calo from the above, as we may convillce -otlrselves by the inspection of other Egyptian monumeiats. It is characterized by a long slender nose, lozg and thin eyel-ids, vvhich run upwards from the top of the nose towards the temples ears placed high on the headS O * Both in his Yoyz7ge en Syrie, &c. T. 1 p, 74; an(l the Ruitles, ou Me'ditaxtiortsg sur les Revnluticns, pt 336. f Navigium sj Fcta, c. 2. (C)per. T. Ilt. p. 248.) X The author of the Recherches slfr les B&yptiexs ss pleased to collsider this as a Dr. BLUMENBACH S Ohservatzons192a sllort and very tlaitl bodily structure,$ and very long shanksf As an ideal of this form , I shall only adduce t1 je painted fernale figure upon tlleback ofthe sarcophagus of Capt. LETHIEULL IER'S mummy in the British MuselWlm, wllich has beetl engraved by VERTUE, and which most strikingly agrees with tlle unequiw vocal natioIzal form of the Hindc os, w5ach, especially in England, is so often to be seen upon Indian paintings. ( See fig. 2. ) The third sort of Egyptian configuration is not similar to e-ither of the preceding ones, but seetns to partake something of both, which must have been oving to the modifications produced by local circumstances in a foreign climate. Tlais is characterizesi by a pecullar turgid habit, flabby cheeks, a sllort chin, large prominent eyes, and rather a plump make Xn the person.+ This, as may llatllrally be expected, is the structure most frequently to be met witl. ( See fige Ss ) I thougllt this little digression the less intrusive, as it appears to me that it may on the olle hand proste usefulS not only to: wards illustrating the history of the origin and descent of the llations tllat were transplanted into F,gypt, and have acquired the general denomillation of Egyptians, but also for the determination of the different periods of the slyle of the arfs of the anczent }Ngyptians, collcerning which we have as yet very imperfect ideas; whilst orl the other band, it migllt lead to much accllrate informsltion as to matter of fact, many very eminent autllors }>ving given the 1m0St In;ongruous representatiEolls of the Egyptian national character, su-ch as WINKELAIANN for mere defiect ln the drawillc<; no doubt arl excWllent e}:pe(litlt tlais, to get rid of d:ffi^ culties in the investigation of national sarieric-s, * Cnmpare with this Ax R I A N 'S represetation of the Ilaclians, Rcr. Indicar. L. , 54z. f Compaie ACH1LLS STAPrIUS E?otic. L. iii. P. I77. on soone Egyptiall MifusXzies193instarlce, ^tlao producec! a svretched figure of a painted rnaslz3 nvithout any character svhatever, engraved in BEC-ER'S Thesaur. BrandenSo. rS. I I I . p. 402, as one of the -most cllaracteristic repre -sentations of tlle forn of the anciellt Egyptians a and svlao, as vvell as several others, will have tllis form to be siznilar to that of the Chinese, an assertion \VhiCtl, after llaving laad oppet^ztunities to cotnpare twentys one iiVilig Chinese at Ansterdam, a11tl 11avirlg si-nce seell in London aloundance of ancient Egyp tian monulueIlts, especially in the British Museum, alld the co-lections of MUr. rrowNLeY, Alr. KNIGI-IT, alld 112 lWarquis of I2AN:D5DOX7VN, laaS ever appeared to zue incoznprehensible. lNdloptillg, as I tllink it conformable to nature, five races of the 11umatl species) viz. 1. the Caucasian C e. the Mollgolian; g. tile MCalaSr; 4. the Ethiopian ; . the Americanv I think tlle Egyptians will find their place betsveen the Caucasicln and the Ethiopiall, but that they differ from none more than from the Moagolian, to which the Chinese beloIzg. Tltls far concerning the bodies of the Egypti-alzs prepared into mulalmies. I shall con-clude with sorne observations oll the probable tneanil, and destilaatiotl of tlle dirninutive mummiesn hicll hasle given rise to the present inquiry. They certainly are not what they have lollg, I believe, universally been taken for, namely, mummies of small clliltlren and embryos. Some of tllem are the real mummies of Ibisesn such as the one of Dr. LElTSOM, alld one of the tsvo in l;he HAM IL TON IAN GO11eCtiOn, ill the LE3ritish MuseumX wllich had by decay been so far laid open as to allow rne plaialy to diStill guish in it the bill of an Ibis9 and other bones of a bird. * See, for example, M. TH R. BRUN N I C EI'S Dyrenes l-Estoric o^ ]Dyre-Sbzmlilg-esx, aldi Unitersitetut3 Aratlr-Tbeater. T. I. p. s. MDCCXCIVW C C Z)r. BLUMENBACH S ObSerVatlOBS194These sacred birds, it is well knourn, wrere usually, after llav ing beell swatlhed round with cotton liandages, placed ill eartllen urns, and deposited in the catacombs appropriated to the Ibises. Sotnetitnes, without being stuck into an urnn tlley were prepared in the form of a puppet, yet so tllat the head a-ld bill projected at the top, one of this sort Ilas been figured by Count CAYLUS. And thirdly, the whole bird was frequetltly vrapped up in tlis puppet form, and clressed ill a Inask, liLae one of the hurnan species. But as tlle tsvo others, sTiz. Dr. GARTHSHORE)S and the SLOASNIAN, wwere externally perfectly similar to tlle abovementioned, I aln 1ed to conjecture (for in the total want of informcation from the cancients concerning these small mullamies we must however fix upon some coq,;ecture), that the manufacturers of mummiesn who made them for sale, in order to save themselves tlle trouble of preparing cl bird took a bonej or other solid part of a decayed tnutnmy, or indeed any thing that was rlearest at iland, dressed it up as the muturny of all Ifbis, and tendered it f-or sale. Whoever recollects what a despicable set tlleEgyptiatl priests were, even ill the time of STRABO, and llow tlze svhole religious worship of the Egyptians svas then already faiVen iiato decay, will not thirlk this conjecture too grattblitous, or void of probability. Or shall sve rather corlsider these puppets as tXe meenento mori whiclll it is sell known the Egyt-i.-*ns wsere zo-{t; to illtroduce av table in their meals atld festivals. Hao.}soaUs saysn that little wooden images were uslt aly carlieiii alzn.}t for this purpose, and I do actuclXly recol]ect }2avirlg seetl su< small wooden representations of mumtnies in tlle Brit;isl-l 1Nu I<t>;rMedf ozv ze 7vcGck of tie; Coeny of Cf t. 2;eivecWe vm rt& cn/ is Wrx:;tcw7z<ean?v.X zy C . tgz tZzwv @ Re e fGesZ . rVIt.^,.t. fe.].h}eZo go . Xe,?seS, M?.S. W.Xrottebtt HzrZZezC;o / ' r]t/ tt-3 4Z /gR/J {/ e Xd{t} 7{atiX t{//t e %/w{/eJ {22/ /'t/ tJ. _CfwwG ;zzi.'. 2 .&// // I =ft,?z5>5 on-some Egyptian lliummies.195stum. LUCIAN also relates, as an eye witness, tllat in his time the dead bodies themselves were introduced at table. It is easy to conceive hovv, during the long irlterval of near 700 years, before the transition took place from the first simple idea to this disgusting practice, such little mummies may at some period or other have formed the intermediate step. The author of the Recherctes sur les Egyptiens seems unwilling to admit that real mummies had ever beenSintroduced al; table: but his scepticism appears to rn@ to be no better founded than the contrary assertion of one of the most eminent physiclans of the last century, CASP. HOFFMANN, who in his once classical work dfe Medicamentis Of icznalibus, in -the section of the Egyptian mummies, gravely relates, tlaat ila Lower Saxony no feast was ever given vi ithout the intr.oduction of a mulntny. And strange as this qui pro quo between an Egyptian corpse and a particular kind of Brunswilck strong beer must appear, it is however a fact that several more modern writers upon mummies have actllally copied it out irlto their workts with implicit confidence. * P. 64z. ( A Saxonibus audivis nulletn apud ipsos convivium transigi posse, sirlc 6C nlummei, uti appellant. Ita olim sine lasere, et hodie Incli sine asa fcetidd nihil co 6 medunt. H;ncn uwui in gptum eulst affer-re secum solent talia cadaser;z4"t c*s 