SXIII. Observations W the fossi! Bonestresented to tbe Roya=Z Society by bis most Serene Highness the Margrave of Anspach, &c. By the late John Hunter, Esq. F R. -St Commani6ated by Everard Home, Esq. F. R S Read May X, 7g+. t n b z bones which are the subJect of the presertt paper are to be considered nlore in the light of incrustations than extrax neous fossils, since their external surface' has only acquired a covering of crystallized earth, and little or 1lo change has taken place in their internal structure. The earths with which bones are most commonly incrusted are the calcareous, argillaceous, and siliceouss but principally tlle calcareous ; and this happens in two ways; one7 the bones being immersed in water in which this earth is stlspended Q the other, water passing through masses of this earthg which it dissolves, and afterwards deposits upon bones which lie underneath. Bones which are incrusted seem never to urldergo this cllange in tlle earth3 or under the water, where the soft parts were destroyedv while bones tlaat are fossilized become so in the medium in which they were depositedX at the animal's death. The incrusted bones hase been previously exposed to * 13ones that have been burie(l with the flesh on, acquile a stain which tlley never lose; and thlose wh;ch have been tong imrnersed in water recelve a consideral31e tlnge. 408The late Mr. TIUNTER'S Observationsthe open air; this is evidently the case with the bones at pre :sent under consideration, those of the rock of Gibraltar, and tllose fourld in Daimatia S and frole the accoullt given by the Abbe SPAL0JANZANI, those of the island of Cerigo are under the same c-irctlmstallces. They llave the characters of exposel bones, and manzr of thezn are cracked in a number of places, particularly the cylindrical bones, similar to the effects Of long expostlre to ttle sun. Xhis circurnstance appears to distinguish tlaerll f-rom fossilizedL bones, and gives us some in 50rl8tiO.l respecting tllwir llistory. If their nurubers had corresponded svith what we meet svith of recent lsolzes sve mlght have been led to some opinion of tlleir nlode of accumulation; but tlle qtlantity exceeds any thIng we can form an idea o-f. It1 all inquiry into their his tory three questions laaturally arise: did the allil-nals come there ancl die ? or svere their lJodies hrought tllere, atld lay ex posed? or svere the bones collected from differexlt places? The first of these conjectuFES appears to me the lmoSt natural; but yet I am by no means colzvinced of its bving the true one. Bones of this descriptgion are found in very different situa tions, wllich makes tlleir present state more difficultly ac counted for. lhose in Germany are found in caves. The coast of Dalmatia is saicl to be almost wholltr formed of them, and sve know that this is the case with a large portion of the rock of Gibraltar. If none were found in caves, but in solid masses covereci WItl1 marl or limestone, it would then give the idea of their having been brought together by some strarlge cause, as a convulsion in the earth, which threw these materials over them y but tllis we can hardly form an idea of; or if they had all been 0n some fosst'l Bones.4o)fourld in caves, we should have imagined these caves were places of retreat for such animals, and had been so for some thousands of years ; and if the bones were those of carnivoroug animals and herbivorous, we might have supposed that the carnivorous had brought in tnany animals of a smaller size which they caught for food ; and this, upon the first view, appears to have been the case with those which are the subject of this paper, yet W}len we consider that the lJones are principally of carnivoloous animals, we are confined to the supposition of their being only places of retreat. If they had been brought together by any convulsion of the earth, they would have been rnixed with the surrounding materlals of the nountains, hich does not appear to be the case; for although some are follnd sticking in the sides of the caves incrusted in calcareous mattern this seems to have arisen frotn their situation in the cave. Such accLlmulation would have made thetn coeval with the mountains themselves, which from the recent state of the bones I should very lnucll doubt. The difference in the state of the bones sllosts that there was probably a succession of t}tem for a vast series of years a for if wte consi(ler the distance of time between the most perfect havirlg been deposited, which we must suppose were the last, alad the present time, we NlUSt consider it to be nzany thousand years; and if we calculate llow long these tnust still relnain to be as far decayed as some others are, it svill require luany thousand years, a sufficient tilne for a vast accumulation: from this mode of reasoning, therefore, it wou]d appear that they were IlOt brougilJc here at ollce in a receat stateX The animal earth, as it is calledn at the bottolu of these carres, is supposed to be prodllced by the rotting of the flesh, which is supposing the animals brought there wiLh tlle flesh oll; but I dc Z4DCCXCIX . 3 G The late Mr. HTINTER'S Observations4.10conceive, that if tlle cafires had been stuffied with whole animals, the flesh could not have produced one-tenth part of the earth, arld to account for such a quantity as appears to be the produce of animals, I should suppose it the remains of the dung of animals who inhabited the cavesn and the contents of the bowels of those they lived upon. TIlis is easily conceived from knowing that there is something similar to it, in a smaller degreen in many caves in this kingdom, which are places of retreat for bats in tlle winter, and even in tize summer, as they only go abroad in the evenings X these caves have their bottoms covered with animal earth, for some feet in depth, in all degrees of decomposition, tlle losvermost the most pure9 and the ppermost but little cleanged, with all the intermediate degrees; in which caves are formed a vast number of stalactitess vYhich might illCrUst the bones of those that die tllere. Tlle bones in the caves ill Germany are so much the obiect of the curious that the specimens are dispersed througllout Europe, which prevents a suffilcient number comirlg into the hands of any one person to make him acquainted with the animals to which they belong. From the history and figures given by ESPER, it appears that there are the bones of several animals 7 butwhat is curious, they all appear to have been carnivorous, which sve should not have expected. There are teeth in number, kind, and mode of setting, exactly similar to the white bear, others more like those of the lion; but the representations of parts3 however well executed, are hardly to be trusted to for the nicer characters, and much less so whell the parts are mutilated. The bones sent by his highness the Margrave of ANSPACH agree with tllose described and delilleated by ESPER as belonging to the white bear, how far they are of the same species on some fossil Bones.among themselares, I canraot say; the heads diffler irx shape from each other; they are, upon the svhole, much longer for their breadth than it; any cal nivorous animal I knonv of; they also differ from the present white bear, which, as far as I have seen,has acommon proportional breadth; itis supposed, indeed, that the heads of the present white bear diffier from one allo ther, but the truth of this assertion I halre not seerl heads enough of that animal to determine. The heads not only vary in shape, but also in size, for some of them, when compared vwJith the recent white bear, would seem to have belonged to an allimal twice its size, while some of the bones correspond in size with those of the white bear, atld others are even smaller. * There are two ossa humeri, rather of a less size than those of the recent white bear; a first vertebraX rather smaller; the teeth also vary considerably in size, yet they are a11 those of the same tribe a so that tlle variety among themselves is not less than be tween them and the recent. In the formation of the head, age makes a collsiderable diffierence; the skull of a youngdog is much more rounded than an old one, the ridge leading back to the occiput, terminating in the two lateral ones, hardly exists ill ?t young dog; alld among the present bones there is the back part of SUCIl a head, yet it is larger than the head of the largest lnasa tiS; how far tl}e young white bear may vary from the old, similar to the young dog, I do not know, but it is very probable. Drawings of the different heads and ossa hurneri, done in a very * It is to be understood, that the bones of the white bear that I have, belonged to one that had been a show, and had not grown to the full or natural size; and I make allowance for this in my assertiorl, that the heads of those incrusted appear to belong to an animaL twice the size of our white bWal . gG X The late Mr. HUfNTER'S Observations412masterly manller by Mr.BATTY, surgeon in Great Marlborough-street, whc) was so obliging as to take that trouble, are annexed to this account. See Tab. XIX. alad XX. Bones of animals under circumstallces so similar, altlaotlgh ill different parts of the globe, one would have naturally supposed to consist chiefly of those of one class c)r order in every place, one principle actillg itl all places. Ill Gibraltar they are mostly of the ruminatilag tribe, of the hare kirld, arld tlle bones of birds ; yet tllere are sotlle of a small dog or foxS alld likewise shells Tllose in Daltnatia appear to be mostly of the rumillating tribe, yet I saw a part of the os hyoides of a 11orse; btlt those from Germany are mostly carnivorous. From these facts we sllould be inclined to suppose, that their acctlmulatioll did not arise from any instinctive mode of living, as-tile satne tnode could not suit both carllierorous and llerbivorous animals. In considering animals respecting tlleir situation upon tlle globe, there are many which are peculiar to particular clirnates, and others that are less confilaed, as herrings, mackerel, alld salmon; others again, which probably mc)ve over the whole extent of tlle sea, as the skark, porptls9 alld whale tribe , while many shell-fish must be confined to olle spot. If tlle sea had not shifted its situation more than ollce, and was to leave the land ln a very short time, thell ute could determine WllAt the climate had fvrmerly been by the extralleous fossils of t}le statiozary alainzalsg for tho$e ollly would be found mixed with those of passage; but if the sea tnonres from one place to another slow]y, thela the retnains c)f animals of diiferent climates may be mixed, bythose of one climate movillg over those of allother, dying, and being fossilized; but this I aIn afraid cannot be made out. By the fossils ve may, however} have some idea on some fossil Bones.how tlle bolles of the land animals fossilized may be disposed with respect to those of the sea. If the sea should have occupied any space that never had been dry lalld prior to the sea's being there, the extraneous fossils can only be those of sea animals; but each part will have its particular kind of those that are stationary mixed with a fexzr of the amphibia, and of sea birds, in those parts that were the skirts of the sea. I shall suppose that when the sea left tllis place it moved over land where both vegetables and land ataimals had existed, the bones of vvJhich will be fossilized, as also those of tllesea allimals ; and if the sea continued long here, which tilere is reasola to believe, then those mixed extraneous fossi]s will be covered svith those of sea animals. }Towl if the sea should again move and ahaladon this situatiorl, thell we should find the land alld seza fossils above mentioned disposed in this order ; and as we begin to discover extralleous fossils in a contrary direction to their formation, we shall first find a strattlm of those of animals peculiar to the sea3 which vvere the last fortned, and under it one of vegetables and land animals, which were tllere belore they were covered by tlle seas and anlong thetn tl<ose of the sea, and under tllis the comlnon earth. Those peculiale to the sea will be in depth in proportiotl to the titne of the seas residence and other circumstances, as currets, tides, Ac. Froln a successiotl of >such shiftings ofthe situation of the sea w e lmay 11ave a stratum of n}arine extraneous fossils one of eart!, niixed probably s^ith vegetables alld bones of laud anima]sn a stratutn of terrestrial extralleous fossils, tllen one of marine productions; but from the sea carryillg its inhabitantKs along urith itX wherever there are thoseof land aniluals there The late Mr. HUNTER'S Observationswill also be a mixture of marine ones; and from the sea commonly remaining thousands of years in nearly tlle same situation, we have marine fossils unmixed with ally others. All operations respecting the growth or decolpposition of animal and vegetable substances go on more readily on the sur face of the earth thatl in it; the air is most probably the great agent in decomposition axld combination, and also a certain degree of heat. Thus the deeper we go itzto the earth, we find the fewer chazges going on; and there is probably a certair depth svhere no change of any kind cala possibly take place. The operation of vegetatioll vill not go on at a certain deptll, but at tllis very deptll a decomposition can take place, for the seed d}es, alld in time decays, but at a still greater depth, the seed retains its life for ages, and when brought near enough to the surface for vegetation, it grows. Something similar to this talies place snith respect to extraneous {ossils; for although a piece of wood or bone is dead, shell so situated as to be fossilized, yet they are sourld alad free from decomposition, and the depth, joined with the matter in which ther are often foulld, as stone, clay, &c. preserves them from putrefaction, and their dissolutisn requires thousands of years to complete it; probably they may be underthe same circumstances as itl a vacuum; the heat in such situations is tIniform, probably in common about 52° or $3° and in the colder regions they ze still longer preserved. I believe it is generally urlderstood that in extraneous fossils the animal part is destroyed ; but I fitld that this is not the case itl any I have: met with. ShellsX and bones of fish, most probably halre tl-le least in quantity havitlg beetl longest in that state, otherxvise they on some fossil Bones.shollld llave the most; f(r tlle harder and more compact the earth, the better is tTle animal part preserved; which is an argument in proof of their havilag been the lotlgest in a fossil state. From experinlenL and observation, the animal part is not allowed to putrefy, it appears only to be dissolved into a kind of lnucus, alld can be discovered by dissolving the earth in an acid; when a shell is treated ill this way, the arlimal substance is not fibrous or laminated, as in the recent shell, but witllout tenacity, atld can be washed off* like wet dust; in some, hourever, it has a slight appearance of flakes. In the shark's tooth, or glosso-petra, the enamel is composed of animal substance alld calcareous earth, and is nearly in the same quantity as in the recent; but the central part of the tooth has its animal substallce in the state of mucus interspersed in the calcareous matter. In the fossil bones of sea aninzals, as the vertebrae of the whale, tlle aIlimal part iS in large quantity, and in two states; the olle having solne tenacity, but the other like wet dllst: but ill some of the harder bones it is lmore firm. In the fossil banes of land animals, and those wlaich inhabit the waters, as the sea-horse, otter, crocodile, and turtle, the animal part is ill considerable quantit;y. Ill the stags horns dug up in Great Britain and Ireland, when the earth is dissolfired, the animal part is in considerable quantity, and very firl7l. lL he same observatiorls app]y to the fossil borles of the elephant found in England, Siberia, and other parts of the globe; also those of the ox kind, but more particularly to tlleir teeth, especially those from the lakes in Alnerica, in which the animal part has suffered very little; the inhabitallts fixad little diff5erence in the ivory of such tusks fronl the Tbe late Mr. HUNT£RXS Observations6reGerit but its havillg a yellow stain; the cold may probably assist in their preservation. The state c)f preservation will vary according to the substance in which they have beerl preserved; in peat and clay I think the most; however-, there appears in general a species of dissollltion; for the animal substance, althollgh tolerably firm, in a heat a little above 100° becotnes a thickish mucus, like dissolared gum, while a portion froan tlle exterllal surface is re duced to the state of wet dust. In incrusted bonesg the qualltity of anima1 substance is very diSerent in different bones. In tllose from Gilaraltar there is very little; it in part retains its tenacitt, and is transparent, but the superficial )asrt dissolves into mucus. Those from Dalluatia give similar results when examined in this way. Those from Germany, especially the llarder bones and teeth, seem to contaill all the animal substance natural to them, they differ 11owever among themselves in this respect. The bones of larld animals have their calcareous earth united with tlle phosphoric acid instead of the aerial, alld I believes retain it when fossilized, nearly ill proportion to tlie quantity of animal ulatter they contain. The mode by which I judge of this, is by the qualltity of effervescence; when fossil bones are put irlto the muriatic acicl it is not tlearly so great as when a shell is put into it, bllt it is more irl some, aIthough not in all, tllan when a recexlt bone is treated in this wtay, and this I think diminishes in proportioll to the quantity of aninzal substance they retain; as a proof of this, those fossil bones which contain a small portion of animal matterX produce in an acid the greatest effiervescence when the ___ . g . J / i/ ' tS 4<*f'/0J: /4att9. AIVCCXClE. X4R .y,.$6. = -P on sontefissil BonesF 4ry surface is acted on, and very little when the centre is a{Nected by it; hovever, this may be accounted for by the parts which have lost their phosphoric acid, arld acquired the aerial, being easiest of solution in the marine acid, and therefore dissolved first, and the aerial acid let loose.tIn some bones of the whale the effervescence is very great; in the Dalmatia and Gibraltar bones it is less, and in those the subject of the present paper it is rery little, since they contain . by much the largest proportion of at imal substance. EXPLANATION OF THE PLATES. Tab. XIX. Fig. t. Orse of thfe incrusted skulls serut over by the Mrargranre of ANSPACH, which is much larger tha-n that of the common white bear, longer for its breadth, and having a greater 11ollow betweexl the anterior part of the skull and the bones of the face. Fig. 2. Another skull, whsch differs in many respects from fig. . and nearly in the same degree that the first does from the skull of the recent white bear. Tab. XX. Fig. z. A portion of a skull, to what animal it belongs is not exactly ascertained, unless it be the growing state of the t?ones in one of the varieties of the white bear species, but it is materially different from the full grown skulls expressed in Tab SIX. It is rather too large in proportion to the others. Fig. 2. Two of the incrusted ossa humeri, to shew that these bones rary very much among themselares, these tWQ be;ng in many respects dissimilar.MDCCXCIY * 