C 67 2 SX. Sn Accognt f the Equatorial I2strument. By Sir Georger Shuckburgh, Bart. F. A. Sv Read March 21, zy93. & Juvat ire per altum ; Aera, et immenso spatiantem vivere cclc), { Hoc sulv pace lracat tantum . " MA N I L x U S, lib. 1* ( I.) BEFORE I enter upon the description of theinstrument which I propose particularly to dzescribe, it may not be im proper to say -something of the equatorial irz general, and of such irlstruments as having been nzade upon a similar principle, have been used by dfferent astronomers, in different ages. The first account tlzat I meet with, of an astronomlcal instrument that bears anyresemblance to it, is to be found in PTOLEMY, (lib. tS of his Almagest) wherewith, he tells us, he determlned the dxstance between the two tropics. This irlstrument ls described under the name ctrpoA:sscou QptM>OV, Xarld appears to have consisted of two circles, placed at right arlgles to each other, onze representing the meridian -or solsticial colure, and the other the zodiac X the former turning upon an axis, placed ltarallel to the axis of the earth, being elevated to the latitude of the place, and the other turrling within it ors two centres, removed 232° from the formeraxis; and was in truth not very unlike the common ring dial,only K 2 68Szr GEORGE SHUCKBURGH s Accoagntabout six times as Iarge. Each circle was divided into 360°, and those again into three or four subdivisiorls, and being furnished (it may be supposed) w;th lwnoveabtle sightsn tlle observer was enabled to take the elevation or depression of any object above or below the ecliptic, tegetller with its distance froln the meridian, or colure tl<zat circle being previously placed parallel to its corresponding one in tlle heavensD The first neasure would give the latitude of any heavenly bodyn and the Iatter the longitude. rtlais instrament, or sortlething similar to itn seeins to have been ill tase as early as the time of HIPPARCHUSS nho lived in the second century before our Saviour, (viue WEIDLERT HtSt. Astron p. 319 v et TYCHOD{IS BRAHE Mechaniva) and was continued to be alsed by astronomers for upwards of fifteen centuries afterwards. (2.) The next account that occurs is by J. MULLER, REs;IOMONTANUS, sive . JOANNES de Monte Regio, who flourished about A-. D. z46$o, and, in a posthumous treatise expressly on this subject, intitled Scripta clarissioni lMatlSematici M. JOANNIS REGIOMONTANI de Torqueton Astrolabia vrmillar2, Regulci magncl Ptole^aica, Baculoque Astronomico* Sc. &>ce irl qu-arto, printed at Nuremberg in S++, has given a pretty full accountg not-only of the armillary astrolabe, but also of tlle torquetum, wllich in fact >as nothing morethan a portable equatorial, and tnay be considered: as -the first i-nstrument truly of this kind. As this trea-tise is become extremely scarce, and I know of oilly one copy in this kingdom, I take this opportunity of apprizing the curious, that it xs-to be met with in the Britisll liiEuseam. A short description, howeverb of the torquetunsf with a pRlate of-the instrtinsent, will ke found in hIons. BAILLY'S Astro of Ihe E-qua.sorz4S Dzstr?Meent. 69; snomie Moderne, rrOtue I. p. 687; and-a description of the astro>;aoiv3n armfilD7are of PTQLEMY, a-coor-dilag tO 1TEGIOMONAANUS'S concept;ion of 1t9 who rnay be considered as the best colnmetltator upcon the Almagest rlow to be met WIth, wlll be founal in WEIDLER)S ]: FiStOrZa jIstronom-i-Sn quarta, rl741. (S. ) The next author that presents himself is COPERKLICUSA (who lived in lJSo) and ill his work De Revalutzone Orbiure ctestzum, lib 2. G. 14. De exqirendis Stellarum Loris, profesJedly describes the same instrument with PTOLEMY, b:ut as it appears to me, something m!ore complicatedS having a greater nll.mber of circIes, and in truth wllat irl later times has been understood by the name, Armillary Sphere. (4.) After COPERNICUS, 1 fir1dl ir} a work owf APIAN, WHO was his contemporary? or a little after him, viz. about SS8, a compleve description of the torquetum, with all the parts of it minutely detailed, assisted by four or five wooden plates, together witll the use of tlle illstrument. This work, whicl is also very scarce, is in folio, intitled, Introdactiv geographica PET R I AP I AN I ig -dactissimas VERNER I Ann3taSiorlesX Ec. Ec. cut regens jam opera Pz A-PIANI accessit Torqvetum, Instrum-entur pulcherrinzuzn sane et utilissir>tum. Ingolstcldii, annv 14533. TOwards the conclusion of this work is a curious letter of RE G1OMONTANUS to Cardinal BESSARIONS De Cvmpositione Me .. teor jscopiz, that is, the armillary spllere tllatr was used by PTOLEMY, with a plate of it. (S. ) TO APIAN succeededS at some distance, but exceeded all that erellt lvefore him2 the Justly ceIebrated TYCHO BRAHE7 who in llis As[ronom Instauratce Mecha?Zgsa, Nortberge, 160e # See also Hist. Corlestis, I,i;b, Prolegom. Tsc-osxs BRAHEIo Algvstw Fisldelz;trum, 1666, IX. Vol. folio, p. I18And-II9e Szr GEORGE SHIJCKBURGH s Account7folio has given us a descrip-tion and wooden plates, of no less than four different astrolabesS under the names of armllz todiacales et eqagatoria of diirent sizes, from 4I to lo feet diameter divided into degrees and minutes, and some of them into every ls or lo secondsa but furnished only with plane SigiltSe These large instruments were placed in towers appropriated to each, with moveable roofsS one half of which was taken away at the time of obserstation. A circumstarxce that it is curious to remark is that TYCHO, WHO was attentive to every thing that could improve the accuracy of his observatiorls, made the axis of his 1o feet circle hollowS " Axis s; ejus e chal-ybe constans, et 1lndiquaque apprime teres; in ;; terius tamerl cavus, ne p-ondere O.fZ*4t in diametro est ;4 trium digitorum ;" a principle that has been very prudently re-adopted in these later tilnes, as will be presently seens (6.) After TYCHO I meet with no instrument of this sort till the time of CHRISTOPHER SCHEINERF about the year 1620 mrho made use of a small telescope, moving uporl a polar axisJ wlth an arc of 47° of declination to observe the sunns dise commodiously, arld exam-ine his spots; an account of which will be found in his Rosa Urszna, folion Braccianin 161gc), p. 347. But this instrument can hardly be considered as an astronomical one, being merely a contrivance to follow the sun with a telescopeS -by tnearls of orze motion only) similar in its object wit;h the heliostate described by I?r. DESAGULIERSN (MathematicaL Elements of Natural Pllilosophy, lib. . c. e. ) (7.) Again FtAMsTEEos sector, which he has described in tlae prolegomena to the third volume of his Histor-1a Ce lestis p. ooS, though mounted upon a polar axisn and very in gerliously contrived for thepurpose it was intsended for YiZ of the Eqmatorzal Instrgmext.to nlSeasu-re the angular distances between the stars, havillg rwo clivided circle at right angles to the polar axis, to take riglit ascensions, cannot come into the class of equatorial instruments. Nor need I here mention :1Wr. MOLYNEUX-'S teIescopic dial, f Sciotherlfum teSescopicum, in z686) though denerldirlg upon the privnciple of a polar axis, which, like a ring dial, or equinoxial dial, was little more than a play-thing forall amateur in astronomy. (8 ) Buvt about the year 17So or y*g5 when the practice of-astronomy had assumed a llew face intllis kingdom, under the skill of Dr.HALLEY and of Dr. BRADLEY, M. GRAHAM invented his sector, for takillg differencesof rlght ascension and declination out of themeridian e and this may be considered as bearin$ a considerable affinity to the equatorial in-strument in principle, and diSering from it only in the ex tent of its posvers. C:)f this mstrument, which is well known to every practised astronomer! a complete account will be found in SMITH s Optics, Yol. II. § t38S. and in SIr. VINCE s Astronomy. I approacla nor to tlle period wllen the modern -equatorial instrument9 properly so calledn took its origin. (9.) Mr. 3AMES SHORT, a person of very considerable eminence for his skill in tlWe theory and practice of optics, arLd particularly for theunexamp-ledl excelle-nce to which 11e had carried catoptric telese-vpes, in which, I believe, h@ has never yet. heen exceeded: WIr. SHORT, I say, probably fineling him*self caupabit of maklng teSecopes,-of very moderate ditnen siORlSs fit for rnany astronoinical purposes, and able to exhibit several of tlle teanrenly bodies by daJrlight, providecI they vsrere fuLrnished w1th a convenierzt appara;us and lllovement for that purpose, appsiecl a two feet reflecting ti^escope, for Sir GEORGE SHUC-KB-SUR S Account-the first t-ime, -to a combinatiorl of circles, re-presenting the horizon, the meridian the equator, and moveable horat circle or cirele df declSination each divided intQ degrees, anct every third minute, furnished: with lelrels, &c. for adjustment to the place of observation. This machine was invellted in or bef-ore the year o749, and is described in the Philosophical Transactions for that year. But as this instrumerlt was furnished witll no counterpoises in any part and the lerlgth of the telescope (two feet) vttas found collsiderably too great for circles whose diameter s^Jas not rllore than six inches, It became unstea4)r, atld urwfit for any other purpose than that of finding arld follow^Itlg a celestia1 object, alad, on account of its lligh prlee also, was as far as I belieste, btlt little made use of. (to.) lIowrever, after some years had elapsed, the idea of an equatorial telescope was agalr; renewed by three several artists in this kingd omn Messrs . RAlNI SDENx Na I RNE, and Do L IJONDS with many and very material improveme-ll-ts, such as to carry the portable equatorial almost to perfection. Of this iNStRl1rL1e11t -M. RAMSDEN had made -three or fourf as earlyg I believe, as tlle year oy70 or 177S; viz. orwe for the late Earl o£ Buten one for Mr. M4KENzzE, another for Sir Jo SEPH BANKS, alld laetly, ortefor myself verith which I snade a great many astronomical and geometrical observations in lFrance and Italy in the years r 77ab and z y-7$, some of svhich may be seen in a Memoir upon the Hei$hts of SOI11 of the Alps -prirlted in the Philosophical Transactions for zy77. Of -thi-s maclaine a plate and description in Fr6ellell was printed in the year z77s, and reprinted in Elaglish ill t7y9. An ample account of this equatorial will be bund i) Mr VINGE'S Treatise.otl practical Astronomy, p. 1S of the Equatorial Igstrumerlt.tn 1771 Mr. NArRNE ptiblished an account of his equatorial telescope, in the Philosophical Transactions for that year, and in 1779# or 177S Messrs. P. and J. DOLLON:D printed an account oftheirs. Each of tllese instrumerlts were f-urnished with counterpoises, and7 in general principles were at least similar, if not the same. The preference itchatI was inclined to give at that time to tny town instru1nent, made by Mr. RA-MSDEN, was owing to the peculiar-advantage of a swinging leve].7 tQ the unexampled accuracy of its divisions, and its great portability. If, in what I have just now said of the three last ir strumentss I should have comnaitted any error uritll respect to the priority of their improvetnentsa Imust leave that point to be settled by the artists-themselves, and shall hasten to tlle description of the instrument -I set out with. But first oneword with respect to an instrument that has been in frequent use on the continentS called, very absurdlyn a Parallactic Machine. ( 1 z. ) The first notice, tllat I find of it, is in the History of the Academy of Sciences Xat Paris for-l721 p. 8? in a lnemoir of WIr. CASSIP{I, with a description and plate of it also inthe History of the sam-e Academy for 1 746, p 12 1 wherein it is said to have been proposedby Mr. PASSEMENT, but without any description-pf it; it wille however be found describedn with a plate of it, in the Dictionnaire dfe Mathemv tique, par Mr. SAVERIEP{: tsvo vols. quarto, 1 7SS ; and this account has been copied into OWENES Dictionary of Arts and. Sciences, in four vols.octavo. Itappears to have been a frame of wood supporting a polar axisn wi-th an equatorial and declination circleS of only a few inches in cliameter X and was in fact no more than a very bad starld to a refracting MDCCXC III-. t Sir GEORGE SHUCKBURGH S Acconnttelescope of 8 or to feet long, giving it a motioll parallel to the equator ; and henee some person, not very learned, gave it the name, Marhzne parallactzquen as if srasposAAosx1$ and 7rospmAAwA. were the same word. It is true that the early astronomers did use a machirle called Regulg parallactice, but that was an instrument to take the altitudes of the moon; and from thence to determine her parallax. Nor can I say mucl in favour of a machine of the same name, described in Mrv L-A-LANI)EVS A1SSrDn. Vol. II. § 2oo4, which certainly does not do a great deal of credit to the state of the mathernatical arts azllongst the French it however may have it;s consre<. nience, as it is probably attainable at a very small expence. The autllor last mentioned speaks (§ 24og) of an equatorial in his possession, made by one VAYRINGE in 17S7, witll circles of 7 or 8 inches diameter but of what construction we are not informed; and the name of the artist isf I confess totally new to me. An instrumet also of this nature, made by MEGNIE, for the President DE SARON, ;S described, and seems to be well imagined for a portable machine. This veryfamiable atld ingerlious gentleman,-Mons. Dz S^ong was so obliging, amongst other civilities when I was at Paris in 1y7S, to she+;v me a small reflector upon an equatorial stand, with some wheel work to keepit constantly following a star, together with an apparatus for the refraction, altitude, alld azimuth, if I recollect right; and in the year 1778 Mrt NVILLIAM RUSSEL, a late worthy member of the Royal Society, sllewed ule a -small instrument of the satne kind, that had been made by the late WIr. BIRD. ( 12.) From the precedingaccount, it must appear that the eqtlatoriale instrumelits hitherto made, either from the small of the Equatorlal Instrument.ness of their dimensions, or defect of tlleir constructions, were 73 totally 1lnfit for the accuracy of modern astrononzy where an error of a few seconds only, in an observation, is all that can be admitted, to entitle it to any credit.* With respect to the precision of astronomical instrumerlts in gereral, I may notice by the way, that firom the time of HIPPARCHUS and PTOLEMY, before and at the commencement of the Christia aeraS to the ageof WALTHER and COPERNICUS, in the beginning of the 16th century, few observations can be depended on to within less than Gn 8, or perhaps even zo minutes; those of TYCHO BRAEXE) indeedn that princely promoter of as tronomy, to within one minute. Tlle errors of HEVELIUSVS large sextant of 6 feet radius, towards the middle of the last century, might amount to IS or oo seconcis. FLAMSTEED'S sex tant to oo or 12 seconds S and lastly, tllose of Mr. GRAHAM'S tnural quadrant of8 fbet radius, vzith which Dr. BRADLEY made so manyobservatiolls from 1742, might amount to 7 or 8 seconds. ( g.) Havillg said thus mttch geneXral;ly 1lpon the subject of; this ingerlious instrumentf andnot moreI trust, than will be deemed, by every lover of this science, what its importance deservesa I proceed to the description of one I havq caused to be xnade byavery able artist of this metropolis, Mr. JESSE RAMSDEN. A33 (:Df E-F, GHn (Tab. IX.) are 4 columns composed of hollow brass tubes inches ln diameterS and 5 feet zo Jnches long, these, with two others one of wllicil appears * l must except filom this remark the two large equatoria1 sectors made by Mr*; SJSSON, for Greenwich observatory;-and also an instrument of this kind, made by Mr, RAMSDEN for the late G>nera1 RaY, and NQW iD the pOSStUSIOIl of Mr, AusExTs ayhow cireles are about ^o i2lches in diameter. L2 Szr GEOR4E SHUCK13URGH s Sccounts@n part at IK, and the other wholly hid behind EF^, are firmly fixed, at their upper ends, to a circle of bell metalg BDFH, and, at their loYver end,$ to an inverted truncated hoIlonv cone* L L L, of brass,in height fl feet, and in diameter at its base AG, X foot g inches. The cross pieces or tubes P,P, as likewise 0,0, and 0,0, serve to corlnect the columns more strongly together, arld prevent their bendirlge These several parts constitute the principal axis of the instralmentj the lower end of which terminates irl a steel point or cone, resting in a hollow conoid of bell metal, in such manner that the apex of the former does not reach to the bottom of tlle latter, but the place of bearing, and of friction, is (it may be) about two-terlths of an inch from the extremity of the cone; the other end of-this axis finishes in a cylindrical pivot N, of about 14 inch long, and 1 inch in diameter, tUEnillg in a Y of bell metal. The entire length of this asis is 8 feet 4, inches, the lower end beitlg supported by an iron frame 4, , 6, 7, 8, which is firmly fixed, below the floors into brick work, and, by means of two iron bars one of which s seen at 28 and the other on the opposite side not visible ira the drawing, is -kept secure from any motion eastward or wtestwardf the lower part of thiSs frame, to about one foot high, is inclosed by a mahcxgany bcoxv or case, g; so, the top of which is intirely covered up, and serves as a die or base to this end of the instrument. The other extremity of this lon$ * Upon this cone are inscribed tlle following words.Hocce Panorgarlon Ura4{ nometric-um a IESSE RAMSDEN, Lolldinensi Optico celeberrimo, et omnibus id 4 genus artificum longe antepolteIldos excogitatum, decem post at}llos nunc tandem {; absolutum, t;;EO}lGIUS S}{UCKBURCH Barorlettus, in tesel-imorltum anzoris sui erga 4 res astroomlcas, et ad easdem promovendas, fieri curavit, arss<o I791.o f tbe Eqvatorial Instrumentt//axis, vis. the pivot X, rests upon the strorlg iron support 29, gos 3s, standirlg ten feet above the floor, made of lnassive pieces cf cast iron, 2 I inches wlde, and 2 inch tllick3 and 11eld firmly together ly bolts and nuts, as in the-figure. 32, and ,are two iron bars nearly at right angles to each other, and at I right angles to the meridian, that conrlect this upright support w-ith the walls of the building, and, going through the brickst are held fast by iron collars and nuts on the outside of the wall; these bars or braces resist any tendency, froln the weight or pressure of the instrument, to push the supporter 29, So; and gl, out of its tapright position; and, being at right angles to eac.h other, serve to keep lt steady with respect toany lateral force that may accidentally be applied. The lower part is continued below tlae floor, and firmly fixed, with mor tar and lead, into the brick work of the arch which will be presently described. The bottom is shut up irl a box or plinth of mahogany, 3a SS, as has been mentiorled in the description of the frame supporting the other end of the axis) at 9, O Near the lower end of fflthe principal axis LN, are inserted lo concentric brass cones or rad ii, aa, bb, cc, dd, ee carrying orl their extremities agraduated brass circle, of 4 feet dlameter, at rlght angles to the principal axis already described ; this circle has two sets of divlsion$, one of points, and orle of lin-es, each into degrees and every lo minutes, and the sutermediate minutes and seconds are read off by the microscopes W and X, -with a moveable wire and micrometer screw, such as has been described in General RoY9s Account of his Instrument for measuring horizontal Angles. (See Philosophical Transactionsg Vol. LXXX. pe s4S.). The cirGle just rIk More correctly +9q; inches. 78S;ir GEORGE SSUCK8URGH s ,Sccountnentioned is inclosed by a circular frame, or rail of mahogany, , 1r which is supported by ten balusters> 16, 17, 18 o9, 20s. \ 217 22> 2s, 24, gS, and serves to protect the brass circle from any accidental in.ury in passing by it, without depriving it of exposure to the general temperature of the room. It, at the same . time7 affords means of support to a small lamp, 1S, whicl by reflection from the perforated speculum at the bottom of the microscopes, to be seen in that marked X, throws light upon the divisions by night. 26, 26, and 27, are iron rods, that, by being attached to the wooden case, 9 1Qn give steadiness to tlle upright balusters, and the circular frame that they support. ahd 2, are large stout brass conesf firmly fixed into the frame 4, S, 6 7, 8, before mentioned and whose use is to carry the uicroscopes W, X n any degree of pliancy or flexure in these cones would be readily discernible in the microscopes, and extremely detrimental to the observationsS they are therefore made as stiff as possible. >, S, is a plane forming the upper -side of the frame 3, 4, S 6 &c. and consisting of 3 platesf two moveable in groovesS and one fixed, furnished with suit able screws, one giving the extremity of the axis a motion vIpward or downward, and the other a motiorl to the right or Ieft: tlliS latter is procured by a rod passing through the cone eg one encl screwillg into the plate below Lf near the centre, -and the other turned by an occasional handle fixed on u s near X S the former motion, siz. of elevating or depressing . . , the axis, is procured by a handle fixed on to a scresv near £@ . . QR is another circle7 of the same dimensions wltll the former, gr$duated in the same mallnern ancl held togetller by eiglatX -conical radiin firruly screwed to a circular centre piece, n71lich . $erves as a base to a large coni.cal axis7 2 feet 3 inches longw of the Eq£coltoria1 Instrume7atorle slde of which is seen at U,, and its exterior extremity near V, with its sliding plate and screws for adjustmellt Close behind the graduated circle, and at right angles to this axis, passirlg through it, lies the telescope TS, M feet long; This circle is likewise furnished with two microscopes, and micrometers) as in! theequatorial circle, one of which is seen at full length at Y and Z, the eye tvibe being at Y, and theobJect glass, with the perforated $peculum to throw light, at Z; the other microscope on the opposite side of the circle is not so discernible in the drawingS being colmpletely foreshortened at Z near T, the eye of the draftsman having been exactly in the axis ofthe tube of the microscope. os, , os, os, os, oc is an hexagonal lozenge, composed of six brass rulers, lSrmly fixed to the colulnns AB and EF, and supporting the lower end of the microscopes, as the pieces R, ,S, in like manner,, sustain the upper end. By these means the wire in the field of the microscopes becomes a fixed immoveable index, arldg after proper adjustment, an exact diameter of the circle, whilst the telescope, together svith the circle, turns round the conical axis before Nmentioned. At P is a spirit level, passing through the centre plate of the conical axis at right angles to the telescope, supported by a cock at each end, one of which appears at k; this cock is fixed to the cone U, and by mean$ of a small toothed wheel and pinion, the level is made to revolve round its -own axis, so that the same side of the leveT may readily be brought uppermost, whatever position tlle circle be {put into, it is also furnished with all rlecessary ad justing screws. It will readily be seen that a telescope, tllus ftted upn will have all the properties of a transit instrument= Sir GEORGE SHUCKBURGH s Accou#twhile the graduated circle will possess those of a meridiars quadrant. For this purpose 1, m, is a stout brass tube, -inclos ing a stiffiron rod, turning upon two fine steel points, adjusted, by proper screws, paralleI to the line of sight of the telescope; this rod is attached to a spirit level of great senXsibility, Iying below it, which, vtth the rod, turns round upon the steel points just mentionedn and is in fact a hanging level of the best construction. At the eye end of the telescope S, is a peculiar apparat-us to correct the effects of refraction and parallax, when an observation is made out of the meridian: it is composed of two levels, a small quadrant of altitude n, o, and a semicircle divideds with its nonius, to every ^', on the breech plate of the telescope, the exterior eye tube having a circular motion, by a wheel and pinion at o, independent of the tube that carries the cross wires; by this means, the angle of the horary and vertical circles may at any time be found, together with the altitude of the object, and then, by the resolutiorx of two right angled triangles, the refraction and parallax, in right ascension and declinationS will be obtained. t, u, are two handles to a HOOK'S joint at x, X7 wllich, turning an endless screw at w, w, give a gradual mo-tion to the telescope in right ascension or decIination, arld this motion can at any time be restrairled by a clamp at qo The handles t, u, are hung-on to any part of the instrumerlt, by means of the line and wire v, vn and are thus kept within the otserverss reach. r and s are two microscopes, placed on opposite sides of the circle; QR3 and at right angles to the line of sight of the telescope, of use only when the plumb line is used in preference to the learel 13 m, above describedv ojR the Equatorial Instrument.81ei-ther fior adjusting the instrument, or observing a meridian altitude. y and z are thinperforated brass plates, attached to the cover that goes on the object glass, and, by occasionally turning them over it, change the aperture to I or +. The cross wires, of which there are 3 vertical, and 1 horizontalp within the eye tube S, have all the requisite adjustments byscrews, &c as in a common transit instrument, and are enlightened by night, by a lamp fixed near to one end of the declination axis U, viz. that opposite the end V; but this part of the apparatus is hid behind the axis and the telescope, except the weight z; wilich is a counterpoise. This lamp throws a light through the conical axis7 which is perforated at that end on purpose on a speculutn in the centre of the telescope, placed at2 right angles to the axis of the object glass, and f-rom thence reflected to the cross wires. This speculu-ms whichRis an elliptcal diaphragm, is perforated to permit all the rays from the j<t glass to pass unobstructed to the eyes 'rhis contrivance has beelamentioned by ML VINCE. ( Pra-cti ca1 Astronomy, ip. 80.) From what has been*alrealfr desbribed, it must now be evide-nt that if the prInclpal, or poIar a;xisn as it has been calledS LN, fbe el-evated to th-e lati-tu(le,, and adjusted to the mendaarl of the place, if the line of slght of the telescope be at right angles to tlle axisV U, and this latter at rlglat angles to the polar axis LN, the brass circle 14 and tS will correspond with the equator in-the heavens, an-d the circle QR will become an horary circle; vis. that if the centre of the wires, in the field of the tele scope be directed to any celestial obJect, on QR will be had its declinationv and on .s and its distance from -tlae m7eridianS om whence, by knowirlg the hwours the ri ascension M9CCXCIIX. M Sir GEORGE SHUCK=BURGH S AccountwilI be obtained,* and consequently its true place ine the laeavens. (14.) Before I proceed, it may be necessary to say some thing of the remaining parts of this apparatusn such as are either rlecessary to it, or concomitant in the use of it. These are, . The lamp to illuminate the cross wires. 2. The: refraction piece;. 3. The plumb line. 4. The moveable roof. . The regulator. 6. The meridian mark. And tTwese will be best understood by inspectioll of the plates, where trab. X figure , represents the lamp fi:xed to the farther end of the declination axis. AB is the -brass case or lantern, suspended on tsvo centres C and Dg within the frame E and F« which isattached to the pillars of the equatorial (I K, G Hy and tllat one hidden behind E F) by the cylindrical braces a, b, c, d. e is the lamp or vessel tontaining the oil, swinging pon the centresf and g, at right angles to C and D; an* by means of this cross axis, and the coulaterpoise h, the lamp is kept constan-tly in an upright position, whatever may be the situation of the declination axis. G(is a chimneyto carry off the smoke from the instrument, and prevent its heating it. z; is a convex lens,that collects tlle rays frorn the flame upon the extremity of the cleclination axis3 U) V wIaich, be-ing hollow, conveys 41l the light to the perforated speculum before mentiolaed, within the centre of the axis and of the telescope, and this is assisted by another conves lens atvthe end of tlle axis, before which occasionally is screwed a pale green glass7 of which there are three, of dif:Nerent shades, to tezlper the light of the lamp7 if necessaryn to the light of the xg The adjuttments which-I have just now mentioried} together with some othert xs;11 be duly explained irl their proper places of tbe Equatorz'al Instrument83star that is to be observed. This light, as wasf said before, being reflected ctown the tube to the wires, the stars are seen upon a beautiful pale green field, the wires appearing black. The centre D being of necessity full two inches in diameter, in order to admit of the aperture and lens i, rests on three friction wheelsS and by this means the motion is as easy as on zthecentre C. At k, 1, zn n, is a small sliding door, to close 1lp the lanterrl from the wind, but which is here removed to shew the illside. (1S.) Tab. X. figure 2, represents the refraction piece. AB is a portionrof the telescopev C the eye tube, a, b, c, a divided setnicircle; dy its nonius fixed to AB, shewing the angle of the horary and verticle circles; es a small spirit level,:attached to the plate on wIzich this semicircle is en graved, and moving with it by means of the screw f, which . . . turns a pinion, that works in a toothed wheel, that turns the whole plate, together with the exterlor eye tube, round its centre, but without moving the tube that carries the cross wires. From hence it may be understood, that by turnirlg the screwf, till the level e stands true, the index d, rliich represents a point in the horary circle, will mark how much the division zero, (oJ which represent:s the vertical, is inclined thereto. 1, k, is a small quadrant of altitude, that, by means of the level g, and screw and pinion hs turning on a centre at m, gives the elevation above the horizon of any object in the field of the telescope. i, is a stall aperture through which a key is fixed on, to give a lateral motion to the wires to adjust them ; and near f is another screw, to adjust them parallel to the equator and declination circle. . 4Sir GEORGE SHUCKBURGH s Accountt16.) Tab. X. figure 3, represents the plumb line arld its frame f it is about 5 feet long, and suspended to the roof of the observatory by the two hooks a, a. A B is a hollow brass tuDe, to protect the plumb line from the wind the line or wire is fixed at the top near b, and sustains the plumrllet irl a glass of water at C. b and c, are tvvo adjusting screws, moving a sliding plate at right angular directions, to vvhich is fixed the upper end of the plumb line. d is a screw, that by means of a pinion moves a rack e, e, to depress or raise the glass of water, and thereby support the plummet, (when this apparatus is moved about from one side ofthe -instrument to the other) and prevent the wirebeing fbroken, andS by depressing it, to enable the plummet to play free, when it is to be used X At A and B -are twoapertures, at 4 feet distanceS corresponding with the two microscopes, covered orl the backside by pieces of transparent ivory, in order to exhibit an agreeable field of view, to observe the coincidence of the plumb line with the cross wires in the microscopes. ( 17. ) I-n Tab. XI. is seen a section of the building in whicll this instrument is placed. As the equatorial is a machine calculated to observe the heavenly bodies in every part of the hemisphereS so it became necessary to construct a chamber, with windows opening to every quarterS north, east, svestx aladsouth; and to any degree of elevation above the horizon. ; Witll this view I erected a building, or small turret, witllin my hfouse) at Shuckburgh, in Warwickshire see Tab XI. where a, b, c, d, represent a section of this room? being about 52 feet square, containing the equatorial AB, resting ol1 its supporters C D. ^ S? o, p, r. q, tX is a hollow conical of the Eq atorial Instrumerittoof$ moveable round its axis upon six frictisn rollers? of about 4 inches in diameter, two of which are seen at s and t. The base of this cone consists-of an iron ring, about >11 feet in diameter, anc1 g inches wide, the upper part of the cone at s, is termilaated by another iron ring 2feet diameter e and these are corlnected by 12 iron ribs, or rafters, in the direction of s, s. Over these rafters lie two coats of extremely thin deal planksx not more t han 8I inch in thickness each cressing each other in transverse directions of the grain of tlle wood, and over these a covering of copper, of about the thickness of > a shilling. Over the copper, oll the outsiden arez tllree good coats of white paint, and the wood withirlside is lined with stout canvas, well painted also; so that the whole roof is as moveable and as light as possibles notluore than 200 or 3001b weight, and withal very strong. At s and sS is an aperture in the roof, ofabout olle footwide, which is opened or covered, suitably to the occasion by the two doors °n p. r is another door, (in the plate) operl S by means of these three doorsn all opened very reacli]y by iron rods withirlside; a prospect is given of the heavens from: the horizon to the zenith, and even to -o° beyond it. q is arlother aperture-about g inches long and 4 widep covered occasionally by a slautts r. * As I flatter myself that I have now executed what the very celebrated Abteo BOSCOVICH seems to have had in tiew, in the x4th opusculum of his fourth volume of -Operv pertinenfia ad Astronomiam, Cc. I cannot restrain myself from citing theh passage, wherein, after desclibing the use of the sntall equatorial, he says; ' Appare£ igitur egregius usus machinx etiam mobilis. Verum Illachina parallactica metallica s cum circulo, et semicirculo, satis magrlis, ac telescopio acromatico, et satis bono mi<¢ crometro fiiari, collocata firmiter irl turri habente tectum mobile esset instru-nenturn ¢ usus immensi et expeditissilni, ac irlcredibilis ad astronomiam cunsl maxime fiructt ¢ excolendam atilitatis.' p. 3o. 86Szr GEORGE SHUCKBURGH S-ACCO8ZatThis littIe window affords a constant view of the pole star in its whole revolution, if the sky be clear, and consequently an opporturlity of comparing a transit and altitude of any star to the southward directly with it7 and,by moving the conical roof roundX any part of the sky may be exposed to tlle telescope. The rollers X s, t, roll upon a: surface of lead, melted and cast into acircular groove in the timbers at EE, and planed truly horizontalX Besides the apertures already described in the roof the room is enlightened by two windows to the south-east, and north-west; and also bytwo oYal ligllts in the side of the cone, nearly east and west and by a third in the zenith at r. v, w, is a platfortn on the outside of the Gones covered with lead; of use iil examining the roof} and cleansing it intime of snow, &c. y and x are iron balusters, very rlecessary on such occasions, with the iron rait at top at x placed obliquely, i-n a plane t-ending to-the centre of the instrumentn irl order that the least possible light from any object may at any time be lost to the object glass. C is one of the iron bars passing through the wallof the building, fixed by a collar and nut on the outside, and resisting the pressure of theinstrument, whose weight, without the supporterss is full oolb. against the support I). e, f 1, and gn h, -n, are two of the side walls of the building risirlg 4o feet :above the ground and serving as bvtments to the arch 1, m, n? which is fartller strengthened by a square frameS of heart of cak timberf 9inches by 6 inches, let into the wall at ,6 held togethertby iron boltsf and going round tlle building. * Besides these rollers, whose axes are horizontal, there are 3 or 4 other rollers, upon a vert;cal axis, exterior to, and bearing against the rirlg that constitutes the base of the cone; by thi-s means they keep the -centre of its motion always in the same place. of the Equatorial Instrumeat.8-7This arch is filIed with solid masonry $ to the height i? tS intQ which, as upon a plane brick floor, the irorframes that support the instrument are firmly fixed with plaster and lead at , 2n and 3? 4 -and hence the instrument seems as steady as 1lpon a rock. b, dn is a; boarded floor that has n¢ connection whatever with the instrument, or its supportersO vn u, are the ttAto mahogany cases that cover up the apertures in the floor, and serve as bases to the supporters C and 99 but do-not touch the iron frames within 8 inch; so that anyyielding of the floor, b, d, by passing to and fro thereong communicates noY rnotion whatever to the instrument. ( 18. ) TQthenorth-east wallf c, d, by means of timberlaid into it and long screws, i>s firmly fixed the clock ors sidereal regulatorn but so as to have no communication with the floor. As it is peculiar in ivts construction, it may de serve sorne notice. Whereas most astronomical clocks shew sidereal time in hours and minutesn, which is afterwardsS in the; course of computation, reduced to degrees and minates; this-t maclline shews .the degree and: minute of the equator, that is upon the meridian at any given instant,direct:ltr without reduction. rrhis is of considerable convenience in obseriations, out of the meridianS with an equatoria1 instrument ; inasmuchS asthe equatorial circle and the clock7 by these means, speak theE . . . . . . . * The br.icks of this arch were laid dry.,. and thengrout; consisting of gra sel and hot lime; waspoured uI?on them ;. when the arch had stood twob yearss the haunches were filled. up with bricks, 1aid.in mortar.. I mention these circumstances. as.attention to them may be of use upon a similar occasioxl, wherlever; it shall be ne cessaryUto erect an arch. bearing so great.: a.weight,..viz. rlear 3o tons} upon such slightA buttressesv . *?t Prhe walls05 this room do not correspond with the cardinal points; the secton here given having an-aspect 53° S. east. 88VSEr GEORGS SHUCKBU-ROH $ SCCOUnsame language. For: this purpose the vibratiorls of the pen dululn are only 23of a common pendulum, = lo" of space; and the index that is carried round immediately by the pen dulum, viz. on the same arbor with the pallet wheel, in one revolution describes lo' of sidereaI space; the next inde-x from the centre of the dial plate shews the degrees, and every 1oth minute, making one revolution in so°. And lastly, the decades of degrees, from z to 36,_ 360°, are shesvn through an opening in the dial plate which in some clocks is appropriated to th-e day of the month. 13ut perhaps this will be better wen from inspection of the plate (Tab. XII.} wherein the han.ds are so placed as to indicate 147° 14t lo'/ The small hand (it may be perceived-) has two sets of figures round its circle7 tlle olle shewillg the minutess and every loth second, the other the rlumber of beats froln o to 60, and this latter enumeration is what alone can be attended to in the observations; that isn the -degrees and every 1oth minute are set -down in the jourIlal immediately from the indexes, and the sllbdivisions below lot are set down in beats of the pendulum, reckorling lrom o to Go, and reduced afterwards at lei-sure. The pendulum,only w7 inches I40in length, is a compourld gridiron composed of * rods, of wllich g viz. the centre and two ;exterior are of iron, and the two next to, and oll each side of the centre? are compounded of silver brass, atld zinc. Tlle zweight of tlle pendulum ball is about 6 poundsn and that of the clock weiglat 32. The spring) by which the pendulum is suspended is said to be so constructed as to produce cycloidical arcs of vibration; but my reliance upon this contrivance is not vertr perfect. The two chief arbors are 3enre11eds the pallets are rubies, alld the axis of the prirlcipal of tSse Equatorial Instrument.89great wlaeel rnoves on friction zwheels; and I believe every care Izas been taken, tlolat -the experiOncew of one of the first artists of this kiilgdorna could suggest, to r-ender it a COIl1p l e t e p i e c e o f m e c a n i s m + I t g o e s fi v e m o n t h s w i t h o n c e witlding Up; and, froln the experience I llave hit.llerto llad.,, doe.s not seem to .vartr its rate besween winter and summer more tl--zan equal to three seconds per day? sidereal time. (19.) Alls I believe that remains for me to, mention, in -this part of tize accountf is the mericlian mark. (See TabS XI I I . ) Au, 13) C Dn 2, is a solid brick pier7 erected at the distance of 297o feet froal the centre of the observatory a 8 feCt higllg 9 feet vide at bottom froz-n A to E, and-+ feet svide at top from B to (:; z foot 6 inches thick at top from C to DS and 2 feet S itlches at bottom. F is an iron bos 8 incllesQ square9 aad 1 -foot high, excTusive of the top, or chimuty; vvitlain tllis box is placed one of ARGAND'S patent lalupsS vzhicn sllines through a circular aperture, ofabout 14 inch, in the front of the box, anci exhibits tlae appearance of a fixed star to the naked eye by night; but the aperture beillg covered by a semitransparent piece of -glass,-ground rough c3n one side, trarlsmiacs aX steady urliform light, that through the telescope resemlJles the disc of a small plarlet 7" in dia¢seter. By maliing the wire ln the telescope, lNllich i5 r onIy 2"2 ln cliameteXr, blsect this cireular light, the instrument maybe v-ery nlcely adjusted to the meridiarl, itldeed vvith so great precisiorl9 that I tllink an error of one second cannot be comSmitted. Around this glass aperture, which by day appears perfectly black, is painted a circle of blackn (on a ground of mrhite) whose extertlal diarneter is o in£hes anCL F -NIr. J;OH N ARNOLDS, M1;>CCSCIIIV N Sir GRORGE SHUCKBURGH S Accountconsequently subtends-an angle of w8". The lisectlon of: filiS last is made use of t day and althoughn lt is true, it is /rather larger than is necessary br a meridian poznt yet lt was convenient it stlould be so, to reder it visible in-the dark winter months, if there was the least vapour risirlg fiom tlle ground. Yet witl:l all this, no error lleecl be apprehencied exceeding 2tt equal ts only 8 of a second of timeX hor that, ullless tlle image should be greatly agitatecl by the vapollrs This rnark is not only of use to find the meridiatlS but also to determine the horizontal point? when once the allgle of it aboure or below the horizon is ascertained 5 and, b3r comparillg the meridian altitude of any obiect with this point, its declination miay be had, almost as nearly as by the level or plumb linee I ought to have mentioned before, that the l)ox F is moveabIe upon the plane B>C? by means of an iron fiame ont nvhich it slides, and screws to adjust it finally to the true * merlc lan. Althoukh there can be no great danger of a solid pier, like theWabove, erect-ed on a foundation fbur feet deep, being likely too move, yet ths doubt, if any should occur, may be e-xaminetl by a plumb line ^ b suspended kozn a; and play s-ng near a corresponding mark, on the top of a post driven into. the ground at c.* X, Ey are steps to ascend to light the lampS or take it in and out at the door d The wholeu is surrounded by lligh pallisadoes3. to protect it om the acci dents of cattle or curiosity* ( so ) Havlngtlius particularlyA described the vatious parts of the equatorialS I trust in a manner sufficiently intelligibIe Eto arly person a little conversant with astronomical instramentsa it maybe proper to saJr something sf its prDcisionS of tbe Eq?2atorial Instrunset.<91br with-oue some competent knowledge of tlae accuractr of its parts, it is in vain to attempt to adjust them and still more so to use them with any degree of satisfaction. And here the chief objects of inquiry have been the accuracy of the divis sions ; the sensibility of the; levels v and the power of the tele scopet I shall begin wih the levelsv and first with the axis leveln Pf k; the parts o¢ which may be seen at figure tj -Tab. SIV vvlaere , 2n i^present the extremities of the axi$ * Of the cirele of declinatio:z X A) a section of tIw-e tube of tlle tew W lescopeS g the levet r-ube, resting in the cocks or supx porters 4* +, and , , a--zld turning on all asis dR e; on one elld of wllich ep is a toothed uiheel g*moved by a small pinion f; turned by the screw head b; and at a, is an adiusting scret to bring the leGrel paristel to the axis , at c is another, to bring the level parallei to its movQable axis dt, e; hn is arl adjusting; screw, at right angles ito Ct to bring the tube of the level 2arallel to its axis z1, e; i is arlother screw, to lnake thls axis parallel to the axis 17 2. All these5 as well as every other adjllsting screw throughout the instruments have chamfered heads, with tlleir circumferences dierided into to parts, and the value of each ascertained, so that, by turning the screws a rhole or any part of a revolution, the angle of motion given to any part may be known The usew of this ie obvious o but the clegree of conyenience is only known to such ersons as have been coRversarlt with these nice adjilstments k and 1, are two lnoveable indexes to be set to each end of tlle bublule. The tube of this level is about 14 inches long; and tlle curvature of it suchn as that by giving it an inclina tion oi: lbft, the bubble znoves about I I<, inch, and the third or . iurth ?art (?f thi$ space is plaiIlly discernible, SQ that no '.,T 2 Szr GEORGE SHUCKBURGH s Accounterror exceeding 3 or 4" need be apprehended, if proper care is taken. The swInging level 1, m fixed to the tube of the te1> scope, for the purpose of taking declinationsn is iinground, and of very superior sensibility as it oughtn having been selected . . expressly from a great rnany yards of glass tubef in order to get one witha proper flexure ; and such has been the success of this care tliat a change of inclinatio'n of this XeveI of one singIe seconda''moves the'bubb1'e nearly ff of an inch, certainly more than ItO. Thisa I am inclined to believe, is the greatest sensibility that has ever yet been attained by a level: it is at the same'time'sotnewhat inconvellient since'it souletimes will reXquire'tsvo or three mirlutes time to settie to its true point, it moves so slow. An error, however, of more tlaan a second need seldom be apprehended, wllich I concelve is as much as could have been -expected from a plumb line of a length equal to tlle diameter of the'circle. The bubble of this level is about 7 inches long, but this varies rith the tetuperature; and I have experienced that with about g8° of heat the bubble colltracts one inch in length; this makes it very necessary to be atterltive to the index at each end of the bubble. The parts of this level lnay be seen at figure 2) Tab. X1V. A,]3 is one'side of the tube of the telescope,, whereon are fi-rmly fixed two upright supporters, or cocks, C, D, and E, F; * 15the motion of tkz bublule be taken to be esTen o, inch, st wxll be found that the rac ius of ctlrvatlIre is more than 1 IOO yards; and, StlppOS ng the letlgth of the level = I2 inches, it wH1 olz]y colnprise, from one en(l to }1Le other, an arch of 1-', and the verse(i sine of 30", in this case., would exprss the depressure of the tube at its extreulities below the cente of the level-abcout half I oI-Co of an nch. Tlle curious ground level, fior adJusting the axis of the transit instrllment at tlle obs servatory at Greenwicl> moves, as I have been ;nbrmed, about 5Io inch for I". ZIJE Equatonal Instrument. 9S in whC11 tEle level GnI4,I, about 12 ilaches longg ssvings upon tvo collaCah ceritres a7 ia truly turned, of polished steela GIs is an laolor brass tubea about 2 inch in diameterS containing within it a steel triangalar axis one extrelnity of which is terininated by the conical centre a and by means of a spiral sprng wlnding round th-e asisS is ma:de tovcontract lts length by pulling the triger g towards I, lby wIaich means the point or centre 49 retires wit]ain the tube G I 9 80 that the . two centres may easily be released konz tlae steel pivotswherein tlley play and the level Inay be reversecla if necessartT9 to adUjust it. It is evident that tlle axis a za sllould be parallel to the line bg b which may be taken for aw tangent to the curvature of the tube at kg and this is procured by the capstan lleaded screw C7 it is also necessary that this same axIs should lbe-parallel to the line ABa or rather to the line of collimation of the telescopeS in a north and south directiong and this is obtained by tlae capstan screw M FirzallJrj it is expedient that this axis be parallel to the line of collinzationf in a direction east arld west and this is effected by the screw h. en ef are two indeses to mark each end of tlae bubb>ea an.d, being fixed to the two concentric . . . sliders ,% whlch elubrace 3 of tlle circtltnference of the tube GIs are moveable any where at pleasure h is one of tsvo scretws) the other being opposite aAnd out of sight) for ad justing the axis vn z; parallel to the liile of * collimation, eastward or westvvardg as has been saicln and at right angles to the decl;nation axis. I proceed next to the c3iv;sions. . . . (2t*) Frhe superior advantages of an eltire circle ourer a * Vide Obserrationes Astronowtce Jrtnis l78Xa I782n I78S, insEzZact ix Obsers+ {oriv Regio lDie7tsiS aUctol e T H O M A ;BU G G E > Hauniz, 1 784. Qarto. Cap. g * Sir Geo az SHuc KS-E RGH S Accougt94 quadrant or sextant, fior astronomical purposes, are almost incredible to a person tllat has not consiidered the properties of a circle, and so great that I a:n much surprised it has rlotbeen brought into more frequent and earlier use For, in the 3irst place, the error of the centre, wllich so constalltly takes place in quadrants, is entirely done away; secondtly, the sluall error in each individual division is discoveredS so that whatever be tlle skill of the artist, the observer is under no obli-gatlon to rely UpOll itv but can examine the whole himself. tRhe methocl I proposed svas this, to make the irldex wires irl-. the opposite micrometers an exact (liameter to the circle arld then to observe wllether each division corresponded with its opposite orle9 and if any diffierence, to set it down S these diffbrences I expected to find somesvhere=o" o, viz. in the diameter -passing througll the true ¢entre of the circle,? and -tlae centre of the pivot, rouncl wlliclo the machine revolved< --4tnd at rigl,at gngles to this they would be at a maximum. The greatest quantittr of this eccentricity, and the placq wllere It laJrg being ascertained, it woulcl be easy to deterv tulne what it was in any other place g for tTlis eccentricity, ill any given part of the circle, woulcl be as the co-sine of tile distance from that point whrere it was at a maximum; and ffi on tilis pritlcipl03 a table was cqnstructed giving the eccentricty at esrerhr degree round tlle circle the nutnbers in this table nzight be colupared with the actual observation of the eccentricityS by the naicroscopes all round the circle and if tlae quaat;ty ln tlae table did not esery where agree with' that fotincl by experitnentS the clifference xvould be the actual crror oiS that iadividlual divisioR; ald ia this ^manner the wholg saig^ht 13e exaznilled,, every error detectedn ansl a memoran of the EquvZorial strutneM.'ikk. ysdX:n Inade of it. Witll this illtention and a full exle¢t7ation of fin:ding the eccentrici>ty _ 8" or lo't7 I set to vork to exa uline the circle a11 round, havitlg previously detertnine(l thediakneter of the points in tlae arch to be about 21t1, and the thickness of the itire-] 2tJ. It iS truen the points were not all exactly of tTle same szen nor could it be expectel? but ino genera1 lt -Xuigllt be concluded that sv1atia the sXlire equally; bi-Sects a poirlt tl>we segment oa tach sid e;)f the svire is aboul; _ 4'1 : so that an trror of -lZ' in the bisect;ion can netver be committed, with a tolerable ligllt and reasonabit care, the miroscope magnifyirlg 16 orl8 times. I placecl the moveable;+ wire of the east microscope so as to bisect the di^zision 36O> and then, by repeated trialsa made tlle moveable wire of thes west tnicroscope bisect the opposite point of 3.80t 7 in which7 takirlg a mean of three or four observations7 I cou-ld not trr more than a few tenths of a second The index of the micrometer screw being then carefully actiusted to zero (o) of the divisiorls of the; head, I nmade earery lotll degree of tlle ¢ircle pass under the lnicrometer wire of the east microscope, which Xwire might now be considered as fixedn and then noted whether the opposite division was under the moveable wire of the west microscope; if notn I wrote down the diffierencet after three or kur tim-es reading Qi. rrhe result o£ these experitnents may be seen i--n tlle adjoined table. BThere The lst column sllesvs tlle point, or division! that was brought under tlle wxre: of theeast lnicrescope. The ed eolulun sl<ews the va<t of coilleidence or howX much t1ze opposite point disagreed witll the wire in tlae opposite luicroscope; at each read-ing oS. The d -column gives the mean diererce, and is double gs-Sir GE0RGE SHUCKBURGH S SCCa?Wn7;the error of -the centre + the sum of the errors of the tw6 * * * UlVISIoS. The 4th column slaesvs thed+Serence of tlle mean reading -off from the extremesS and rnay be cons;dered as the greatest actual error in reading offtheQie okserslatioils. Theth column contains t:he tululSnrs in tho Sd colLum . \ . . :;corrected, by subducting o".g, a quart-ity rvhlich, it was found, upon taking the mean of all tlle rlunxLkers in tlle gd scolumn, the opposite or nzest micrometer was too forxvard upon the circle, viz. did not make a pei Sect diazueAX:er, but es-ceeded it in tlie order of ttie detrees by o".g. It will be -kobserved that this quantity, from the three first series o:f observations of the points 360s alad of30°, seemed to amount to et'*6; this-diSeretlce is inconsiderable. The numl3ers then -s-n the 5th column thus corrected will express the t:rue di{: fierence l).etween the oppo3ite divisions, if the wires in the microscopes had described a true cliameter. The 6th column gives the half of the difference just menu tioned, and is _ the simple error of the divisiorlst iof the Equatorial Instrusneat624 s Difference of Column the mean 3d corfrom the rected.I 2 34-West nwi croscope, ahd difference.East micro$cope.Differ rence or the mean Xrt st_West miX c2 oscope, and difference.Mean diffe rence.East rnicroSCOpt.Mean diffe rence.Simple \ error.Column 3d cor_ SimpIc rected. error,o w 360 oltmean of 1 xo oo I90.20 03o ol I>sto ogo QI,3560 o24o. 8 + 228 t 3,6 r 3.6J 25°t*1 + 3,2 t 3xo l a,QJ1,357O oThose with * affixed are doubtfiul or bad points.MDCCXC I I 1.Table of-tlle Divisions of tlze Equatorial (:Dircle 98sir GEO RGE X SHUC £BU RGH S AGDOUStFrom inspection of the precedirlg table of observations it will readily appear, that I was much mistaken in my espectation of an eccentricity of 8 or lo", ffor that, in trutEzs there seemed to be no fixed cause of error; and that therefore the error of the centre had little to do in occasiolling those diffierences in the opposite microscopes, which only once alnounted -to 4", and this in fact was double the error of the centre added to the sum of the errors in the two opposite divisions, together with the error of twice reading off, and that the simple error never exceeded, and but once amounted to w8',6. This being the case, I think it fair to conclude, that the eccentricity never amounted to any sensible or measurable quantity, viz. never exceeded ",$ ancl that consequently all the variety we see, in the west or opposite microscope, arose from the error of the divisions, inequality of the points imperfection irl reading off, or a little pIay in the screw of the micrometer. But, as alI these together never but once alnotlnted to 2'/, I think it luay fairly be presumed that that is the greatest error tllat will arise, in any observation made with this circle when only one A microscope is used, and that probably only half that error will take place. * EIow extremely small a qllant-ity this is, may be seen by considering that, on a radius of two feet, an arc of IoJ amounts only to ^ o,o6g8 iloch. Of l' f o,oo70 of 1" to (-in round numbers to about -6IoO inch. ) o,oool 16 Viz. to about 8 titnes less than the Zhinim?Wm visibile tv the naked eye. This I teckon, with my own eye, at 8 inches distarlce is about ,,0lO; inch; but then it must be considered that the microscopes magnify }6 times, and will therefore render a space visible that is 1wO-OOinch, or about _ o''z ,-which we shall sooIl find to be the fact. o^,(the,:quatorial Ins.trven,nt.J99dtAfterthis examination of the eqllatoriaI circle at every lo°> It did rlot think it necessary to proceed:: inthe examination of each degree, and still less of every lot, as I 11ad intended. I th-e-refore quitted this and went to the declinatioll circle, which underwent the same trial. The results of wlwich will be seen in the adjoined table; tlle divided arch of the decli. natiola circle beirlg turrzedP towardsXtlle east.so e too; Sir GEORGE SHU-CKBURGH S Accounl Table of Observations of the Dvisions oaf the Declination Circle.1 )ifference of Slmple the mean error from extreme.Fartheat X st microo microscope scope next xlext the the eye. obJect glass.9oo o/Farthest X st micromicroscope scope next next the the eye. -objectglass. Divn from S. pole. O, o , IO O IO om 11 Xt + On2 '-0s3 > -0,2 -1,0 0,3 + °X7 + 0,3 °+3 , 0,020 0DiSe rence of the mea \ from extreme. n s),5 I,0 0,5 o*7 ov7 Qn4 0, o,6 o,6 O,IlWean ,diSe rence.Mean diffe rence.SimpIe errore t, v35 + ov450 + OvIi + 0,1 -0,2 + 0,1& -0st + ov3s iQ, + 0,25tlJt9oo ot] -I,0 t -0,3 _ o,8 IOO ] + I,9 | + o,4 S + o,5 1 + x,oJ I I0 o,sl + o,6 1 _ o,: J I20 oJ5 + °,7 + °,4 I 3o -Q,9 _ o,6 + °+3 I40 +0,2 -0, I g + on7 J 50 ) n4 x3 _ ons I60 * , -0,I + I,2 , +0,2 1 to,7J I70 + I,2 t °v4 + °,3 I80 +°,4 io,6 + o,+°,7 C,9_ 0,1 -099-°>QSIC0 I I0 120 3o lAo I 5o* I60 I70 4,8 -°,35MeanZo o] -0,I t -o95 [ _ I ,ZJ 30 o] -0,5 t I,5 [ -0,7J Xo ol I,0 < 099 -2,0 50 0] :-296 t -3'7 ( -2,8J Zo lo/l + 4,4 t + 5,2 f + 4X5J 60. n 1,5 t _ 1 ,o f + °}4J 7o. l 1,4 9 _ 2nO { 2,6J 80. ) + 2}+ t +3,1 [ + 2,6JC),6 -0,9 -I,3 -3) + 4>7 on7 -2)O +2,7o,6 -,33o o 5t« 52 I0 60* 7o 80*+0,2 -0,+ +°,3 >4 +0,7 o,6 osso,6v4S Qn7 o,6s°X7 ,595 + 2,354+ ovo4 °,57# Denotes a doubtfill or bad point.o o,6 I 3sof all80 Mean of She Equcltorial Instrument. O. Froln the preceding tabl-e of observatiolls of the declination circle it appSears that these divisions were very littIe, if any, inferior in accuracy to those on the equatorial circle. Anda firlalIy it appears, that the erro-rs and probabilityof error were as follows; viz. in the equatorialcirele, fiom 22 COt responding observations of opposite divisiollsy ObsnIn oa the error amounted to 2't therefore the probabilityagainst;this;error was _ 3to 1 _ to 1 = 1 to 2 from s9 corresponding obthereire probability against this errors 2," -; 18 to t 12 o S to X -to t1 4 t I = 23 to 2 wYations onv bothclrclRes7:about zFs8. 'tW1 t4. aboutQ oAnd in the declination circle, servations of opposite divisiorlsj Obsn Tn l?tlle src amounted to about-4^o o 0 Therefore from 41 double obseOEfsn. Irl the error amoutlted to 2t' vis. =4o ro z g _ _ 92 = 4 to 12. 1 = 22 to 1 2 2. i i2' 1 to ;s We may conclude, therefore, that in both circles no error of more than2/ need be apprehended from the centre, and from the divisions tak together ; and that in general it will probably not exceed lt1, on condition that the micrometer screw head is readoff thricey which sn some observations Sir GEOROR $HUGKBU RGHSSE: AucountlOQ nzay be; dolle, if necessary. Lastly, fhnf takinga mean of all the numbers eiIl the thcolumn, it seems; ie plaKe error, an reading off the divisions, isonly ott, in; the e-quatorial circle, ando",$y in the declination circle. This source of er-> ror may therefore be put at ot'> ; so that if one\ quadrant only of the circle should be made use of, viz. only one micrometer, and tlaat enly once read off, it is probable that no trror of more tllan 1112 will be committed. I9merltion tllis becauseu it wilI sometimes happen that only one such observation caxl be made; but where sufficientX leisure will allow the reading oWboth the rnicroscopes, this smallA error of lt'+will probably be halved, arld if the declination circle be turned half round, and the observation repeatecIfg inthe sani-ema-ner, upon the two remainingquadrants<of tlie circle, as is done;(we shall presently see) svhen the line of collimation is examillecl, this error will probably be quartered, or reduced to Iess than °{t2' t Afts the very rigorous examirlatiorz the divisions of these two circles haven-ow undergone, and from the general knowledge that Ihave had opportunitiesto obtaln of the state of practical astronomy in diffierent countries s and when I consider that the celebra-ted artistS the late Mr. JOHNB1:RD, seems to have admitted a; probable discrepancy in the divisions of his 8 feet quadrants, amounting to n 3't, I t-hink IE am entitled X believe that the accuracy of these divisions und-er collsideration is hardly to le eq-ualled, and still less to be exrelled3 by that c)f any astronomical instrunaent irl Europe; and, from the-unexampleddiligence and care,with whic} the kilful artist Mr. MATTHEW BERGE, workman to Mr. RAMS, . t Sce Mr. B 1 R D S Methed o£ constructingMtlral rQuadrallts. London, .s 768. of iDe Equatorzal Ixstnm-ente3zl:'SDE-Ne has execated 9em, I -itI myself bgndEto -bearlthis tesa timony to his merit* (22.) It remains that I now saysomethingfof the power of the telescope; for it is to ilittl@ purpose0-that the di-visiorls -be accumte, or theflevels-semilble, unless^thet fbrc-e-of tllDe telescope be such a-s to correspond wit-h: the :sensibility of :t11e one, and the accllracy of the other. 'rhe object glass is a well -corrected double achromatic, whose joint focus ss 645 snches, with an aperture of 4,2; inches. The telescope is furlli-shed wi-th two sets of eye--gla-sses, one single, the other Xdouble, of these elatter there are 6, of different magnifying powers, from 60 to 360 times; of the former there are Sy witth pow-ers from lSo-to S$o. To these omay be added a prism-eye -tube, with a power of abouMt 1oo, for objects nearthe zenithj or the pole, and similar to the one described bt7 t-General ltoY; (see Philosophical Transactions, Vol. LXXS. p. S) also a-tube with a divided eye glass tnicrometer; (-see Philosophical Transactions, Vol. LXIX.) it has a power of 80>but the; images are not distinct, or equally brigllt, ancl the extent of the scale is so small, not more than lo', that it is, in truth,but-of little use. The double eye tubes are composed of two eye glasses, to enlarge the field and rerw-der it more agreeable, both placed on; the hither side 0of -thecross wires, so that they-may at any-time be cllanged, without deranging the wires. The lowest of the compourzdeye tubes, with a power of about 60, is what is generally used for transits and polar distances. For telescopical observations * IIC, as has been generally imagined, an angle of I' iS about the smallest that is v;-sible to the naked eye, (SMI-rX'S Optics, § 97) with a power of 60 times 1/} will l)ecome visible; and, in that case, the power of this telescope will corlespentl with the le rels, and the divisio3asX as was required abovee Sir GEORGE SSUCKBU RGH; S XCGoUXt4of the planetsg higher powers may be put on ; and of theses that of 4oo seetns to be near the maximum that this glass will bear; with Soo the image is not so wellSdefined-; with 20Q or 3ooS it is beautifully distinct and bright; but this inquiry demands more experitnents than I 11aveE hitherto made, having been able to procure these highpowers only within a few veeks (23.) Having now given as I apprehend a very satisfac tory idea of the accuracy of the parts of this instrumetlty I shalI proceed to the method of adjusting tllemX This machine not being capable of 1zaving; its -polar axislaid horizontal its adjustmentsn in some respects, fwillbe di£erent from those of small instruments of the same ruatne« (See the methods proposed by Mr. AMSDEN inbhis Description, and by Mrh INCE, inxhis Prwtical Astronomy*) It may be proper -to premise that the principal psoints required are, ost. to adjust the level P, k, parallel to the declination asis U, V. edlyy to adjustthis axis at right angles to the lineof collimatiOllr of the telescope; and, Sdlyp to make this axis at right -angles to the polar axis. Probably otllers may be devised, but tlle mode I have adopted is as follows. The polar asis is placednearly in tlle meridian, by mea2ls of a meridian rnark, previously verified, and elevated pretty nearly to the latitude of the place. lNhis is tD be done more accurately afterwards by the sliding plates, and screws? at the bottom of the polar axis. * Whoever is destrons of s.ceing sotne very ingenious disquisitions of tlw errors a+id adJllStmeDt Of this inStrUment Wi11 d9 We11 to COnSU1t the Abbe BOSCOVXCHIS. Opera pertznet2tia ad 2Nstronomia?a et {°ptiscam} quarto, Bassan; I785. TOmi 4i ()pUSCUW fllm xturz of the Equatorzal InstrumenfsThe asis of the declination circle is then brought nearly horiz-ontal by its proper level, vize is turned roundrabout the polar axis ttll the bubble of the level stands true between the indeses; the instrumerst is then turned half round about -the polar axis,_ 180°, shewn by the microscope W. If the babble then stand true, it requires no correctiona but if it dd not, correct half the error by moving the equatorial circle by its handle ts and the other half by the capstan screw a S (Tab. XIV fig. 1 ) then turn: the instrument back again to its first }osition, and see if the level stand true; if not, repeat this operation till it does, correcting one half of the error by the equatorial handle, and tlle other half by the screw a. The -declination axis will then be parallel to the level, and both of them to the horizon. : It mustV be remarked, that in this operation it will be necessary to move the decIination circIt rourld its owrz axis a little, irl order to bring the same side of the level uppermostt but this in no degree affects the result>for tlle imaginary line, round which this axis revolves, is wllat is meant all along by the axis and is the line to which the parallelism of the level is referredc The declination axis remaining in an horizontal position, ^vith the level aborre the axiss as in Tab. IX. tllrnthe declina-tioncircle 180°, viz. till the level fbecome below the axis e then, by means of the pinion b7 restore t:he tube of the level to an upright positionf Jand see if the bubble stand true; if not, correct 2 the error by the screw c all-d tlle other It by a. Now turn the declination circle got eacla way from its last situationand repeat the examirlation of the bubble, and co.rrect, as before, 2 by tIae scresv h, at rigllt angles to c, and > by the screw is and if; aftelr all these MI:)CCXCI I h P Sir GEORGE SHUCKWU EGH S ACCOUXtcorrectionsy in earery part of tl entire revAutionof the declination circle round-its axis, and of the ivel round its asis, the bubble st-and true it folIows, that the axis of the declination circle and of the level, are in every direction parallel to each otherS both of them to the tangent of curvature in the lnicldle of the level, and:r all -three to the 11orizon. Ihi-s adjustment is therefore complete. (24.) It remains to be seenj whether the line of sight of the teldcope is atrigIlt arigles to the declination axis, and th-is Iatter to the polar axis. Take:the error of the collimation of the telescope in right ascensiona t a star in the equator7 viz. let the transit of a star in the equator ovs the assumed merIdiaOn be observede with the declination circle turned tonvards the east, and also tolvards the west. If thereN be any diffErence in these observatiorls, it will denote double the error cf collimation iEl right; ascensionn and half of it will be the deviation of the line of sight from a llneat right anfes to the asis of the declination circle; and is correspondent to a similar adjustlnent of a transit instru ment. . . 1e amount of this error being thus ascertainedS let it lle cormcti by the screws at the eye end of the telescopey t zat move the wires to the east and west.) The declinationt axis by means of its level, being restored to an Plorizontal positionS let the centre wire of the telescope (by svIz;ch is always anderstood the line oScollimatlon) be brought to bisect the meridian mark, t means of the sliding plate and adjustlng screw below the polar axSn tlle telescope svill then become a complete transit irlstrutnent; for, by thet47tt operatioh the declination axis is made parallel to the level and its axis and both to the horizon; by the seconda tlle lirle of sight is put: f the Equatorzal Instrxwetblorat:tight angles to this axis X arld thirdly, it s acljusted X the . * 1* merlulan Now let the error of collimation ln right ascension-, in the same manner be oleserved with any star out of the equatorn by a circumpolar star, (the nearer the pole the better) suppose the pole star. If any difference should be noticed in its 3assage, with tlle circle east or west, halve tllat diffierence and it will be equal to the angle that the plane of the decIination circle makes with 1;h@ polar axis, if the oh.served star were actllalwly inN the pole S if not, divide it by the sine of its declination, and the true angle of the plan-e of tlais circle (or of the line of colllmation3 -with tlle polar axis? will be had Again if this operation be repeated with any other stars, arld the error so Wound be dividedby the sine of their declination,; the error bf -the planeSof the declination circle at the pole, viz. its greatest error, or angle with the polar axisn w-ill be had. And note, if these observations are made with stars on each side of the equator, these qualltitiesfwill be had in opposite dire tions. Finally the same-may be done by two land objectsf one to the north, and the other to the south; the rzorth and south meridian znarks, for instance, proper consideration being had to their declinatiorw; by this means the error will be thrown in contrary senses,; or doubled and, from>a firariety of such results a very correct mean quantity may ultimately be g 13y difFerellce is here meant, the difference takell in minlltes ancI secollds of a great circle passiIlg through the star, and wh-icth can only be dilectly measured by a micrometer; but itas is most conn7enient, this quan-tity shotlll be observed by t-ines or 1oy tbe divisions on the equatorial c;rcle, (15 and I6) this quantity must be dilllinislled ill the proport:ion of the radius to the sine vf the polar distances viz. multiplied by the cobsine of the deGUluation; hetlce it is that this met-lwod is capable of great preci.K.(3in. Sir GEORGE SHUGKBUASH S Accountdeduced; and -when found, must be corrected by the $crews at one end of the declination axis. I have been rather diffuse in the account of this adjustment, because it is one of tlle most importalat in tile whole instrument, and cloes not readily present itself. It has now been seen thats lSt7 the level and its axis are parallel to the axis of the declination circle. 2dly, the line of -sight at right angles to this axis, and parallel to the polar axis; and consequently the declination axis at right angles to the polar axis. sdly, the poIar axis parallel to that of the earth. These are the chief requisites in the adjus-tment of this instrument. Thosethat remain are secondary, and I shall take them in the following order. lSt. The adjustmerlt of the cross wires to the focus of the telescope. 2dly. The hanging level. gdly. The line of collimation, north and south, as well as east and westward. 4thly. The index wires in the microscopes sthly. The refraction apparatus. Andy 6thly, the power and scale of the microscopes. _ teS ) f irst, th-e cross wires. Let the eye tube be adjusted to distirCts vision fior parallel rays by some distarlt object, such as Jupiter,, Saturn, or Venus, by daylight; that done, observe, while cune limb of either of these planets appears running alorlg the equatorial wire, whether any motiorl of the eye, upwards or downwards before the eye glass, alters the reIative place of the image and the wire9 --if a motiorl of the eye ul3wards moves the planet xn the same direction the wires xre too Snear the eye >ss, and must be pushed in, and wice versa, till the image become fisecI upon the wire, what* The heads Of these screws being divided into lo parts, and the Yalue Qf each }nown, any given correction is easily applied of th4e Eqaatorial Instrumext1'09ever lbe the luotion of the-eye. When this point is obtaine&, the eyes-top witAh its wires, must be there fixed, for that is tl:weir true place; viz. the correct focal pointof: the object glass ;. aIldJ whatever i:ndistinctness may bze found, from the diverw sity of eyes of diffierent observers, must be corrected by themotion of tlle eye glass only. AJnotller; point to be secured is the permanency, as Xr -as may be, inbtkhe position of the ob iect glass c fQ-if thls be notcorrectly centeredS wilich is very rarely the ¢ase, and i-ndeedw never to be expected, that isy if its axis be-not conc@ntric with the axisofr-the ce]l, in which it i$ fixedj any lsotion of this-latter, by screwing or unscrewing its may not oily c3iange tlie -place^of the focus, t which thewires are adiusted, but will necessarily move the line of col-^ linwationfl liothin rlght ascensionartld declination.* To obviate; thi-s thexefore, two corresponding marks should be made * wit-h a:graver,both upon-thvecell, into/w4hich the glass is burnishecl:, and al$o uwpon the tube of the telescop-e, into;which the cell is screwedf or other.w.ise insertecl, that in case the object glassw should ever bes taken out to-clean it, &c. it mayv be restored very nearlyy ift not exactly,> to itsAformer p* * sltlon. The eye; glass, object glass, and ; wiresj being thus settled xn the-ir respective places to each other, it will notbe an im p-roper time toS measure the interval between the wires, which canrlot bes too; accumtelys done, being of F suchconstant use t this m-ay be eithern ljtn byw observing: theCpassage of a*; star iiz the equator, and maki-ng proper allowances for the rate of the * By moving my object;-glass a-n entire revolutionin its screvs the. line of caIlimation appears to move through a littie circle of 56' in diameter, so-that the eccentricity9 {n this instance, appears to-have been about ^ 0 inch. Sir GEORGE SHUC3<BURGH s AMccou^toclock, or by a star out of the equator, and tnaking proper alI-owance for the decIination in the proportion of the radius to the co-sine: or, 2dly, by means of the equatorial circle and a fixed land object; and here the quantit;y must-be diminished in the same ratio of the radius to the sin;e of the polar dis tance. I have made use of both methods, as -a conl'irxuation of each otherS and find the interval, whicsh is equal in tllc three utires of my telescopeS to be 7' 34" j5 = 30"n3 sidereal time, and these three wites divide the diameter pf -the field very nearly into four equal parXts. ( 26. ) Second ancl ^third adjustment , the -ha$iag level. By means of its proper 11andle u, Inove the declillation circle about its axis, till the bubble vf the hanging level 1, m, rests true between the indexesn there fix it by the clamp w, reverse the level, by taking i-£ outof its pivots= alld tttrpingti-t end for end X if tlle bubble nov stand true, the level is adS justed; if notn correct the error by the declination ha;ndlies and tlle otller I by the small screw at the bottom of the level; then reverse the level, and repeat this ol?eration tilXl it does. The level, or rather a tangent to its curvature at its midzdleg will be parallel to the axis9 on WlliCll it swings; and both will be horizontal. At ths tirne look through the telescope, and see what land object is covered by the horizontal wire S now invert the telescope, by tvarning it 180t round the declination axis, and z8O° roundthe polar,and bringing the level true, it will then point to near]y the same place f and if exactly the same object as before be now coarered by-tlle horizontal wire the-axis of the level is adjusted parallel to the line-of collimationn in a vertical direction; if not, correct half the error by tlle little capsta) screvv at the bottom -of the cock or armb <2e Eq#ab7w1 hstranwrt,t1;tthat supportsone end of vthe b axis of -the levela and :thU other half by the declination handle b aintet the teletoope, and re; peat the operation till the ame ohject is covered in both po sitionsa and the level is found true then wilithe learel and wi-ts axis be parallel to the line of collimation, -and the ohject cov-ered by theiwire maylie coticluded to be in thev horizonX ( 27. ) Fourth. The index wires of thWe microscopes.The line of collimation, with respect to east and westS hRs been already adJusted as aboYe (secot. 24j ) r.t tllen the declination ax-isf by its leYela be restored to an horizontal position S at this time ad just the index wires ila the two equatorial lazicroscopes W X to bi sect the two opposite divisions g60 and <So° then will tilese wires be rectified to their proper place. That being done. bring go° or the division that represents the equator on thew declirlation circle under its respective microscope andt tur the whole instrument one quarter round on the polar axis,, viz. till goo on the equatorial circle be bisected by the micro-* meter arld if; atthis time) the bubble of the hanging level appear true7-the index svire of the decllnation microscope is eorrect; if not correct half the error by the declination handle un and half by the little screws hS (Tab. XIV. fig. 2) at the side of the hangillg level e then reverse the telescope, viz. turnit till 27O° on the equatori;al circle come under the misrometer wre -aad if:dle level then rest true the iadjustment iscomplete > if not, repeat the operation.7 as befbre til it does n thenf by its proper screw brirlg the index wire ofthe declirlation tnicrometers to blsect tI1e pOillstS 90 and gGG. The irldexes of both circles will Jbe then adjusted, and t}le axis of the hangirlg level brought parallel to the line af collimationy with respect to east and west, as well as with respect to Sir GEORGE SHUCKBURGH s icooxntt:S nodh and south. Note,-: this parallelism -of the axis of the level to the line tof-collimation in a direction east and westO does not appear to be a very important rectification, but on some occasions may have its use. (28.) Fifth. Tlae refraction piece After what has been done this apparatus will be easily adjusted. Bring the telewope, t means of its two levels P k,>and I m, to point to the torizon and in the meridian; then, by tlle two pinions J; h, {Tab. X. fig. 2) of the refraction piecre, brlng its two levels e and g to rest true u luove the nonius d; of the little setnicircle of the horary and vertical angles a b c to the middle of the divisions or oo t7 and also that of the little quadrant of altitude 1> ka toot o and this part is adjusted (29.) Sixth The microscopes. The magnifyillg pQWtt and scale of tlae microscopes is all that retnail1s to be considered The magnifying power of a compound microscope as 19 tvell known (see SMITH'S Optics § 127) depends on the-proportion between the distance of the object and of its iluagey from the objectglass, togeth-er with the proportion between the fbcus of the eye gIass and ordinary focus of the eyea looking at a small ohject (suppose of 5Ist or I oo inch). These t\\T() ratios compounded give the power of the microscope. The former is called magnifbring by distance, and is a material part in the construction of these microscopes; the scale of the micrometer being regulated by this part of the magniting powero For example3 let the distance of the object from the glass be-1) and the distance of its ilnage = 4 its power will be ; and consequently the scale of the micrometer, or motiorl of itss screw, to answer to .Ot7 (suppose) must be of the Equatorial Instrumentb4-times as great as the space occupied by 1o';on the limb of the cirele; and if the radius of the circle be 2 feet, an are of to' will be equal to o,o7 inch nearly, orz the limb; and,28 inGh on the scale, viz. =to the same arc on a circle of 8 feet radius o arld if each revolutiorl of the micrometer screw be intended to describe ', the screw must contain about g$ threads in an inch. But as it would be difficult to adjust the screw exactly to the scale, the adsralltage of tlle construction of these micrometers isS the scale:may at any time be adjlusted to the screw r for let the intersral between any two nearest divisions, lo', on the limb, be measured by the screw, and suppose, instead of being-1o' or tioo", it appears only = S7°"; it is evident, that the scale is bigger than it should be, or, which is the same thing5 that the image is less by or a-to. In this case increase the distance between the microimeter wires, and the object glass, 2tO, by unscrewing or drawing out the tube, that carries the micrometer and eye glasses, and the scale is adjusted. It will at the same timej however, be necessary to re-adjust the object glass of the microscope to distinct vision, by the screw of the cell? that contaills it, until the image and the wires have no relative change of place by any motion of the eye. This willsagain occasion some small alteration in the scale, and must be corrected by repeated trials, and the scale adapted to; the divisions on the arc X alld if the moveable wire of the m-icroscope be now brought to coincide exactly witll the fixed one, ancl tlle moveable ilades (with the rnark +) brought to Xzero (o) on the screw head, the micrometer is completely adjusted. i , This having been done with all the microscopes, and the opposite ones being made to agree, each with the otller, in such JD-CCXCIlIv Q Kr GEO-RGE SHUCKBURGH S SCCOUnZ4manner, that the fised wires may-become a correct diameter I believe the whole instrtlment will have been completely adjusted. (o*) Before I conclude this account I must beg leave to trouble the reader's patience a fbw minutes more, in order to give a general idea of-the marlner of making the ordinary observations of right ascension and declination with this instrument. Let t11e teIescope be adjusted towards the meridian marks in such manner that the centre wire may exactly biseet it; then note if theY index wire of the equatorial micrometers bisect the points Qf 360° and z80°. If it does, the instru{ment is prepared for o-bserving a transit; if not, and the differen-cebe considerable, it must be corrected by lmoving the poIar a2si;s, by its adjusting screw. But as this quantity vfill oeldom exceed 81' or loX', -it srill be more convenient to note this quarltlty in the journalf and allow for it afterwards in re ilging the observations.-* As this quantittr will from time to o Th}smay be done by the bllowing trlle. 0 A x si Px slne zentth dist= x the correction + or _ according as the telew ssne polar dist. . . -scope points to the east or west of the meridian . -Wheiz ls = the erroI on the equatorial circle, :And P--the angle that the polar axis makes with a ray from the meridian markO And if there should appear any errvr in the brisontal posifon of the axis of the declination circle at this time, by the level not standing true, that error may be cor rected by this-theoxm -: sin-e alt. 13 X = x the correctio SlIle poll dlSt. d . . . WhereD is = anfe of depression of one end vf this axis below the horizorl And by moans of the above theorems, a table reay be calculated tllat will give these forre£tXns always} rby laspectIon; such a table E have computed br my own usea but f the Eqaa-torzal I)Z!WZ^Raezttime lJe variable from a variety of causes, such as the possible settling of the svalls of the building; the prtial or irreo gular expatlsioll of the instrumerlt, frorn the sun-keams accidentally falling upon it; from the eSect of a fire in tlle rooln or the lleat of a person's body in cold weatller; from the sun's lleat upon the meridian markn eastward in the morrairlgS arld westward in the afternoon; frorn tlle same effect upon the obserrratory; and lastly, possibly froln a latyal reErac tion of the ray coming from the meridian mark, -from irreguIar vapours floating near the surface of the earth. From some, or all of these causes, this quantity of error will be fourld to be exactly the same hardly for two days together * but Is laave never yet known it to exceed lSt' of a degree,o",7 in time, during a period of mol^e than a year, and very rarely above 61' or 7") sometimes on one sideS and sometimes; on the other. When this error is krlown, and set downX move the instrument about the polar axis by its handle , till the divisions g60 and -805 are bisected by the equatorial svire; this done, move the declination circle by its handle-utill the hanging level stands true, and note the division on tlle declination circle cut by the tnicrometer wire, for that is the horizontal point, froln svhence the altitudes are tobe reckoned. If the order of the clivisions be sucll as to shew declillations, this clivision will be the allgIe of the -coaltitude of the polar axis X but if the divisions be such -as in my instrument7 it will be equal to the altitude of tlle polar axis, which should T3e equal to the latitude of the place:. But as it is suited only to one latitude it is not given hele. Tables, somethIng similar tothisg may be seerl in Mr. L U D L A M S Astronomical Obserta<ionsa Cambridgeg X; ¢ , and also in the ConZZoZssace des Temps, pour I 7gz, pZ > I . O 2 Sir GEORGE SHUCKBURGEI s Accountas:this will seldom happen, fromhthe same reasont as have al ready been mentioned, I prefer taking a luemorandum of this quantity also, and allowing for it; by which means I see its alteration, from time to time, -compared svith the weather, know better what I am about, than if I attempted to correct itS and save a great loss of time. From hence it must be seen that llothing is depended on, but that the instrument keeps its place during the four or five minutes that the observer is occupied in making the observation. (^g1.) The instrument is now prepared for an observation over the meridian, and also of the polar distance; at which moment, if the weather should be cloudy, the observation incomplete, or unsatisfactory, it may be repeated as many times afterwards as is thought proper, taking notice of the distance from the meridian, shewn in the equatorial microscopes, and making allowance, in the reduction, for the motion of the sun, or planet, during the interval ; for I esteem an observation made witllin lo or 15° of the meridian, nearly equivalent to a meridiall observation. But, if an observation should be rnade out of the meridian, the altitude and angle of the horary alld vertical circles must be t-akenf by the refraction apparatus f and with these arguments the refraction and parallax, in north polar distance, ancl in right ascension, may be found by inspection, in the tables that follow this acevuntS and consequelltly every observation readily reduced to the * * . merlc .lan. (32.) I shall close this long history with an accourat of the probable accuracy of the observations rnade with this iastru merlt, viz. of the amount of the probable errors, derived from an experience of luore than twelve xnonths. Arlci first, wit}x of the Eqgatorial Instrument.117;sespect to those of right ascension. It must be readIly seenS that the amount ofthese errors will be pretty nearly the same as those of any other transit instruxnent, whose magnifying power, and length of axis? are the same. However, frotn act;ual trial, I find that the passage of a star, near the equator, over any one wire in the field of the telescope, rrzay be deterlnined to within 3 of a beat of the regulator, in strictness to about ",7, and, from a mean of the three wires, to-within 1",25 of a degree, =-It2of a second of time; tllat is, if the vvind be still, the weather favourable, and reasonable care be taken.Ancl? from a series of observations of the suns diameter throughout the year it appears, the error in ordinary observations: may be expected to lie-within '/; that it is 17 to 1that this error does not amount to 5",_ 3 of a second of timev and this includes some of the worst weather in which obserfirations are likely to be made. I shall therefore say, that The probability of error of an observation of a transit over the meridian, under tolerably favourable circumstancesS from a mean of 3 wires,-viz in estimating the beat ,, of the regulator, is about _ 230 Add to this the error of setting the instrument tow the meridian mark = ,o Add, also, the-error in reading off the equatorial mleroscope 0,,5Total error of an observation in the meridian becomes To this add the error of the divisions, and of the centre (at most) -=S25o s18Sir (;EORGE SEUCKBURGH S 3bC088tAlso the second reading oF of t;he microscope ,3 And the total error of an observation of a transit ovt of the meridian, wiIl be = So The same, from actual experiment, in 13 trials, withtn zo5 on eacll side of the meridian (in Feb ruary 1792) _ -7¢SThat is, that an observation made out of the meridian, will giVe the transit over the meridiall true to 2 a second of -time The error in the observation of a polar distance may be put s avs tol ows. Error of the eye, in estimating the-coirlcidence of the wire in the telescope witll the obect, the power ,, being 60 times w Error of the divisions, and of the centre, in taking the horizontal point in the circle ^_ w , Error in reading this division off by the micro scope _ _ _ _ _ O :; Error of the leveI, irl ordinary observations = > Error of the divisions, and centre, a second timeS tiz. in taking the allgle of the polar distance = Error in reading off this di-vision by the microscope _ o, Sum of all these errors = 6, Ditto, by actual observation of the line of collimation, the circle being turned east and west from ra,, rious experiments, appears to be 7, fLastly if care be taken irl the observatiorl, and the of the Equatorial Instrument.119 su1z not suSered to shine on the instrurnent,, ouly during the moment of observation, I think no error Ss -in the polar distance need be apprehended exceeding 7> And in the meridian passage, none exceeding , So that it appears, that the right ascension will be observetl sx,rith twice the precision of the polar distance. And here we tnust not omit to take notice, that of all the above mentioned causes of error, one onlyn viz. the error of the divisions in taking the polar distances appears to be fixed, so that, by repeating the observation, the truth may be ap-proached to any given degree of accuracy. I have thought proper to make these remarks on the errors of the instrument, that if heaIth and leisure should enable me hereafter to offer to the Royal Society the result of any astronomical observations with it, it may be known to what claim to precision they are entitled. In describing the-instrument, the following refErences inWab. IX. were omitted in the text. fB ggn hh ii, are the eight conical radii to the declination circle, described page 78. , 12? are two supporters to the0clamp and endless screw, page 80* is a pair of stops? for the convenienceof the observer fSir GEORGE SHUCKBURGH s AccountE:xplication and Use of the following Tables. The three first Tables are particularlycalculated for the *txse of the Iarge equatorial instrument for the purpose of clearing obserlrations with -it from the eicts of refraction and parallax. The four last are adaptecl more peculiarly to the small or portable equatorialX such as has been noticed in sect. 10, and which I thought might be acceptable to such persons as have the good fortune to possess one of these irlstruments. Of these :Fables in theIr order. Table I. gives the correctionof the refractiorl in nortll po lar distance, by enterirlg it with the altitude at the top, and the angle of the horary and vertical circles on the left hand side t and in the common point of meeting is found a quantity, in seconds and decimals, that is to be added to the apSSarent poIar distance, to give the true; this correction is always additive. ^ But if the same table be etltered with the allgle of the horary and vertical circles, in the right hand column it will give the refraction in rightw ascensionS by multiplying the quantity here found by the secarlt of thedeclination, to be found irs Table IV. Table II.: gives the e«ect of the sun's parallax in right ascension and rlorth polar distance, and is to be entered with the same arguments as Table I., and the parallax in right ascellsion is to be multipliecl by the secant of the declination, as belSore; the sun's horizontal parallas beillg assumecl-8'1,6. able III. is a similar Table, only calculated to an horizontal parallax of zo'; so that wllatever be the parallax of th_ sun or planets7 this correction luay readily be lound7 almost by inspectlbn. f the Equortorial Xstrgment.TabIe IV. is the natural secants to each degree, extracted kom SHERWINVS Tables; being of such constant use in these -stomputations, I Ilave placed it with these tables of refiaction Table V. gives the correction of the time; viz of the sun or starvs distance from the -meridian, in an observation with a port-able eWatorial, not prev-ously adjusted to the meridian n this quarltity is to be nultipli.ed also byvthe secant of tlle declirlation. Table VI. as its title imports gives tfl7>e correction of the meridian line in minutes and decimals, which was thought near enough for a portable instrument S the quantity here found is tcs he multiplied by the secant of the altitude. Table VtI. simllar to Table I. -only reduced to seconds of time, gives the refraction in right ascerlsion, suited to the usual mode of dividing the small instrument; viz. into civil hours arld minutes. Table VIII. similar also to Table I. gives the refractiorl in declination. The arguments ar.e the sarne in a11 the Tables 7 viz. the altitude, and the angle of the horary and vertical circles v Wh-ich appeared to-me the only means of maliing the Trables universal, and adapted to all latitudes.$ Thoir foundation is tili^S-: D A Let AB be a portion of a \ / vertical circle = the refractionL > / irl altitllde; DA a parallel to \ / thehorizon;andDBaparal6\ + A-table of refraction in right ascenson aLld declination, for the latitude of Paxis only, may be met with in the o;Xxozssce des Teatlps, poxr I79I. What I have givEI} in the bllowing account, viz. Tab, V. VI. VII. arld 07III. I calculated br my owrl 1lse, as carly as the year I 774. MDCCXC I I I. R Sir GE0RGE SHUCKBURGH-S ACCQUnt1222lel to the equator : then A C will be a portion of an horary circle the refraction in declirlation, found by TableE I. and TableVIII LCABntlle atlgle of the horary and vertical circle ; C BS the refraction in right ascension, follnd by Table I and Table VII. DA, the correction of the meridian) bund bysTable VI. v allcl DB-the correction of the timeS found by trable V S and, as AB will-hardly ever be found to excted 30'> these triangles have been considered all as plane; luaking due allowancea in the proportion of the sine to the radiuss for the clistances of tlle arcs DA BC and DB fiom theirrespec tive poles which has been noticed at the foot of each Talule.e^ The refraction in altitude having been taken from Pro;fbssor MAYEX>S Tablesg IJondon editionn 1770 which is calculated for a density of t;he air expressed by 29n6 inches of the baw mmeter and So° of FAHRENHEIT)S thermometer; and for anyf other heights of the barometer and thermometer, tnay be corrected In the usual way; making an allowance for each degree of FAHRENHEITES tllermometer, above or below S°° of 42tg5¢ This correction has been deduced frorn the result sf a great many observations that I made solne years since with the manometern described in the Philosophical Transactiotls for the year wy77 Vol LXVII p. 564. The equation that astronomers have generallv been used to adept3 from Drr BRADteJs C)bservationsf is for each degree of tAtle ther tuollneter; btltn I think) erroneously. * I hare pl+tOpO§ed multiplying by the secanta instead of dividlng by the co-slnes as bexig the reader opeiatonj,,Xad wI1Sctl comes to tI1e s-ame thingt [To face p. 122. No. I. Table of the Effect of Refraction in North Polar Distance. This correction is always +. Angle of Angle of the vertiDEGREES OF ALTITUDE. the vertical with cal with the the horary horary circle. 2o 4o 6o 8o 10o 12o 14o 16o 18o 20o 22o 24o 26o 28o 30o circle. o ' '' ' '' ' '' ' '' ' '' ' '' ' '' ' '' ' '' ' '' ' '' ' '' ' '' ' '' ' '' 0 18 1 11 42 8 25 6 30 5 15,6 4 24,0 3 46,4 3 17,5 2 54,7 2 36,3 2 20,9 2 8,0 1 57,2 1 47,6 1 39,0 90 2 18 0 11 42 8 24 6 30 5 15,3 4 23,8 3 46,3 3 17,4 2 54,6 2 36,2 2 20,8 2 7,9 1 57,1 1 47,5 1 38,9 88 4 17 58 11 40 8 24 6 29 5 14,7 4 23,4 3 45,9 3 17,0 2 54,3 2 35,9 2 20,6 2 7,7 1 56,9 1 47,3 1 38,8 86 6 17 55 11 37 8 22 6 28 5 13,8 4 22,5 3 45,2 3 16,4 2 53,7 2 35,4 2 20,1 2 7,3 1 56,6 1 47,0 1 38,5 84 8 17 50 11 35 8 20 6 26 5 12,6 4 21,4 3 44,2 3 15,6 2 53,0 2 34,8 2 19,5 2 6,8 1 56,1 1 46,6 1 38,0 82 10 17 44 11 31 8 17 6 24 5 10,8 4 20,0 3 43,0 3 14,5 2 52,0 2 33,9 2 18,8 2 6,1 1 55,4 1 46,0 1 37,5 80 12 17 37 11 27 8 14 6 21 5 8,7 4 18,2 3 41,4 3 12,8 2 50,9 2 32,9 2 17,8 2 5,2 1 54,6 1 45,2 1 36,8 78 14 17 29 11 21 8 10 6 18 5 6,3 4 16,2 3 39,7 3 11,6 2 49,5 2 31,7 2 16,7 2 4,2 1 53,7 1 44,4 1 36,1 76 16 17 19 11 15 8 5 6 15 5 3,3 4 13,7 3 37,6 3 9,8 2 47,9 2 30,2 2 15,4 2 3,0 1 52,7 1 43,4 1 35,2 74 18 17 8 11 7 8 0 6 11 5 0,3 4 11,1 3 35,3 3 7,8 2 46,1 2 28,7 2 14,0 2 1,7 1 51,5 1 42,3 1 34,1 72 20 16 56 11 0 7 54 6 7 4 56,7 4 8 1 3 32,8 3 5,6 2 44,1 2 26,9 2 12,4 2 0,3 1 50,1 1 41,1 1 33,0 70 22 16 41 10 51 7 46 6 1 4 53 4 4,8 3 29,9 3 3,2 2 42,0 2 24,9 2 10,6 1 58,7 1 48,7 1 39,7 1 31,8 68 24 16 28 10 41 7 41 5 56 4 48 4 1,2 3 26,9 3 0,5 2 39,6 2 22,8 2 8,7 1 56,9 1 47,1 1 38,3 1 30,4 66 26 16 12 10 31 7 34 5 50 4 44 3 57,3 3 23,5 2 57,6 2 37,0 2 20,5 2 6,6 1 55,0 1 45,4 1 36,7 1 29,0 64 28 15 55 10 20 7 26 5 44 4 39 3 53,1 3 20,0 2 54,5 2 34,2 2 18,0 2 4,4 1 53,0 1 43,5 1 35,8 1 27,4 62 30 15 36 10 8 7 17 5 38 4 33 3 48,6 3 16,1 2 51,1 2 31,3 2 15,1 2 2,0 1 50,8 1 41,5 1 33,1 1 25,7 60 32 15 17 9 55 7 8 5 31 4 28 3 43,9 3 12,0 2 47,6 2 28,1 2 12,6 1 59,5 1 48,5 1 39,4 1 31,2 1 24,0 58 34 14 56 9 42 6 58 5 23 4 22 3 38,9 3 7,8 2 43,8 2 24,8 2 9,6 1 56,8 1 46,1 1 37,2 1 29,1 1 22,1 56 36 14 34 9 28 6 48 5 16 4 15 3 33,6 3 3,2 2 39,9 2 21,3 2 6,5 1 54,0 1 43,6 1 34,9 1 27,0 1 20,1 54 38 14 12 9 13 6 38 5 7 4 9 3 28,0 2 58,4 2 35,6 2 17,6 2 3,2 1 51,0 1 40,9 1 32,4 1 24,7 1 18,0 52 40 13 48 8 58 6 27 4 59 4 2 3 22,2 2 53,4 2 31,3 2 13,7 1 59,8 1 47,9 1 38,0 1 29,8 1 22,3 1 15,8 50 42 13 23 8 41 6 15 4 50 3 55 3 16,1 2 48,2 2 26,7 2 9,7 1 56,1 1 44,7 1 35,1 1 27,1 1 19,9 1 13,5 48 44 12 58 8 25 6 3 4 40 3 47 3 9,9 2 42,9 2 22,1 2 5,6 1 52,4 1 41,4 1 32,1 1 24,4 1 17,4 1 11,2 46 46 12 31 8 7 5 51 4 31 3 39 3 3,4 2 37,3 2 17,1 2 1,4 1 48,6 1 37,9 1 28,9 1 21,5 1 14,7 1 8,8 44 48 12 3 7 49 5 38 4 21 3 31 2 56,6 2 31,5 2 12,1 1 56,9 1 44,6 1 34,3 1 25,6 1 18,5 1 12,0 1 6,2 42 50 11 35 7 31 5 24 4 11 3 23 2 49,7 2 25,6 2 6,9 1 52,3 1 40,5 1 30,6 1 22,3 1 15,4 1 9,1 1 3,6 40 52 11 6 7 12 5 11 4 0 3 14 2 42,5 2 19,3 2 1,6 1 47,5 1 36,6 1 26,8 1 18,8 1 12,2 1 6,2 1 1,0 38 54 10 35 6 52 4 57 3 49 3 6 2 35,2 2 13,8 1 56,6 1 42,7 1 31,9 1 22,9 1 15,2 1 9,0 1 3,2 58,2 36 56 10 4 6 33 4 42 3 38 2 57 2 27,6 2 6,6 1 50,5 1 37,7 1 27,4 1 18,8 1 11,6 1 5,6 1 0,1 55,4 34 58 9 33 6 12 4 27 3 27 2 47 2 19~9 2 0,0 1 44,7 1 32,6 1 22,9 1 14,7 1 7,8 1 2,2 57,0 52,5 32 60 9 0 5 51 4 12 3 15 2 38 2 12,0 1 53,2 1 38,7 1 27,3 1 18,1 1 10,4 1 4,0 58,6 53,8 49,5 30 62 8 27 5 30 3 57 3 3 2 28 2 3,9 1 46,3 1 32,7 1 22,2 1 13,3 1 6,2 1 0,1 55,0 50,5 46,5 28 64 7 54 5 8 3 41 2 51 2 18 1 55,7 1 39,3 1 26,6 1 16,6 1 8,5 1 1,8 56,1 51,4 47,1 43,4 26 66 7 19 4 46 3 25 2 39 2 8 1 47,4 1 32,1 1 20,3 1 11,1 1 3,5 57,3 52,1 47,7 43,7 40,3 24 68 6 45 4 23 3 9 2 26 1 58 1 38,9 1 24,9 1 14,0 1 5,5 58,5 52,8 47,9 43,9 40,3 37,1 22 70 6 10 4 0 2 52 2 13 1 48 1 30,3 1 17,5 1 7,6 59,8 53,5 48,2 43,8 40,1 36,7 33,9 20 72 5 34 3 37 2 36 2 1 1 37 1 21,6 1 9,9 1 1,1 54,0 48,3 43,6 39,6 36,3 33,2 30,6 18 74 4 58 3 13 2 19 1 47 1 27 1 12,8 1 2,4 54,5 48,1 43,1 38,9 35,3 32,6 29,6 27,3 16 76 4 22 2 50 2 2 1 34 1 16 1 3,9 0 54,8 47,8 42,1 37,8 34,1 31,0 28,4 26,0 24,0 14 78 3 45 2 26 1 45 1 21 1 5 0 54,9 47,1 41,1 36,1 32,5 29,3 26,6 24,3 22,4 20,6 12 80 3 8 2 2 1 27 1 7 0 55 45,8 39,3 34,3 30,2 27,1 24,4 22,2 20,3 18,6 17,2 10 82 2 30 1 38 1 10 0 54 0 44 36,7 31,6 27,5 24,3 21,7 19,6 17,8 16,3 14,9 13,8 8 84 1 53 1 13 0 53 0 41 0 33 27,6 23,5 20,7 18,4 16,3 14,7 13,4 12,2 11,4 10,3 6 86 1 15 0 49 0 35 0 27 0 22 18,4 15,8 13,7 12,3 10,9 9,8 8,9 8,2 7,5 6,9 4 88 0 38 0 25 0 17 0 13 0 11 9,3 7,9 6,9 6,2 5,5 4,9 4,5 4,1 3,8 3,5 2 90 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0,0 0 0,0 0 0,0 0 0,0 0 0,0 0 0,0 0 0,0 0 0,0 0 0,0 0 0,0 0 Refraction in right ascension, x sect declination. This correction is on the east, and + on the west side of the meridian. Angle of s t S #44the srertiDEGREES OF ALTITUDE. cal withQ _46o 38°320°the horary circle, o o 46 8 lO v . t r _ I 2 3r4 r ID lg 2Q . 6 8 2 34 * _:-+ 36 4 i h43 4 46 48 ge 53 4 6 3 z 64 66 8 7o _. 72 74 76 __ 80 8z 4 6 8 o ovoAngle of tile vertical vith the horalry circle. o 9O 8 86 84 2 o 78 76 ,74 7 7o 8 6hi 54 62 60 58 5 54 52 _ ' 46 42 o 6 34 32 3 24 2.3 20 I 43 6 8 6 450 52 /1 ,, A8> 1 4449 48, I 4429 48 p° 44s 8 47n8 4497 4776 44>5 4-7v4 44e 3 472° z 43-29 46a7 4.3 26 46+t 43n2 .*..a.. 45)7 A277 45 v: 42)3 ++i6 4x,6 +329 +l,0 4392 AOg3 a2,5 39)6 _v_ 4 I ,6 3 St9 aonS 3821 3979 37,3 38F9 36J3 37<9 SS,+ 3639 34-24 W .t 35XS 33,3 3A,6 3Zn3 3.3fA 3I72 3 z) 2 30.?0 3039 25928 2 9 S 7 2 28XS 26X4 26.9 z5, 1 2525 33zS . Z$,0 2 Z) i 22i5 21)1 2X70 937 X 9nt I 8y3 I 87 I 629 X X 5 s4 I4.,8 X 3-29 I332 {274 I I 6 I0n9 8-93 7)8 6.7 t593 r 5 2 497 3 + 3> I 1 >7 I 6 OnQ 0)0SA° X6 58° {> /1 {8 In7 38>7 35,8 4In7 38n7 35,8 4I 6 3856 t5v7 aI,5 38a5 35,6 4I>3 3833 35S5 -At X t 385t 3is3 4O,8 37nS 351o 4°O5 37O5 2Ji-J7 4,03 i 3 7iz 34 sA ., 39sS 36)S 3A, 3932 3623 33nd 38n6 3559 33): 3 8> I 35 23 3 3v7 37nA 34)S 32)2 36 8 34,3 3 I *6 36tI 33'5 3InO 35n3 32)S 3°>3 3+55 32vo 29,6 Vt. 33)7 3 153 28n9 33gg 3094 28,Z 3 t$29 29ZS 27Sa . . 3On9 2837 26s5 29§9 27,8 2St7 z8,g 26XS 34nS * w7)8 25z9 23,9 26n8 24,9 2229 25,7 23XS 2Z,O 2 Z4,5 32Z7 2I>o 23)3 Z I n6 I 959 22e 1 2OS5 X 889 wo28 X s3 t 729 I 995 182 I 16>$ I8X2 I6Xg I 5a7 s6,9 5>7 i+nS I i 55 * I 474 I 3iA 14J3 I313 I2v2 I 2,59 I ;>O, I I ,0 sS 10>6 9>$ I 05 I tn3 _ X 8 6 Sio 7n4 7nz 627 6, I S 97 S 54 5 vo _s _ 4)+ 4'° 3,8 2>9 23 2, InS I,4 In3 OnO O;O 0J034o 36° t / 1I I z4,7 I I 8)7 I 24>6 I I S>7 I 24b5 I 1 8s5 I 24n2 I l 8)3 I z3bg I t7A9 X 23y4 I I7I5 I 2Z38 I l7)° X 22j2 I 6)4 I 2 Is4 I 1556 I se+5 I I4)8 I 927 I I 35g I I8a5 I I2l9 I 7>+ I t )9 I I621 I I0,7 I I 498 I 9n5 X I3n3 I 8)1 I I In7 I 6,7 I I0)3 I $,2 i I 8n5 I 3)6 I 6,7 I In9 I +,8 I 0-,2 I 2) 8 S 8'4 I Oug 56)5 5 8 77 54n6 5G7 52F7 54FA so 6 5 2) I 48y449nZ 46) 47)3 44+° 4479 4 I 7 42n3 39,3 39a7 36ng < 37a1 34}4 34}4 3 Iv9 3 1 56 29,+ 29so 26)9 26>3 24,3 Z3 *3 Z I,7 zog 5 I 920 1776 IOn 14stZ I3j6 I I s7 10S9 S> 8): 5)8 5f4 zg 2)7 0 0>O Q 0)0 0 02O4oo l 1 8,2 I 8n2 I 8nO I 7n8 --I 7,5 X 722 I 6>7 I 6)2 I 5 6 9 I 4nI I 3,2 I 2>3 I {,3 I 0n2 S9sI 57}9 569-d 55)3 5338 S2n3 Soy7 49$1 4774 45+7 43+9 +2, 4 40io 38nZ 36v2 34vi 3 2) I 30} I 27,8 ZS,6 23,+ Z 1al I 6gS I Is9 956 7v7 A,8 'seA : O 0>O Jo onO, 55)3 5Sv3 SS,Z .S 55to 5A,8 54)S 54s I 53)7 53 >2 5*z)6 5 2no 51O3 S°nS 4957 48vG 47)9 46s9 45s9 8 +s,6 . 4 r ;7n4 25 38 2d,4ZZ 7 Z I nO I 95J*I6, I4n3 I 2n5 _s_ 10XS 9 S t 3+7 In9 020I /W 1 3Io5 I 3I,+ I 3 Is3 I 3IsO I 3 0n(5 I 30} T I 2935 I 3338 I 28no I 27X° I 26/.0 I 24/9 I 23)6 I 22v3 I 20,9 1 I9j3 I 317)7 g I I4) l t] o jI I IO2I I 8)0 I 5)9 I 3}+ I ItI 58.SS 5bS 53)8 5X)2 48a4 SsS 42F,9 4°} ][ 37n2 34)3 3IN3 22S, S 3 ZZ,2 t955 ISn9 I2YS , g, 6)5 3)3/ ,, I 1 3/3 I I 333 I 13¢3 I I298 I t 2>5 t l IZgI I I I>6 I I I 50 I I O+ I 9)6 I 858 I 7a9 I 6i9 I SsS I An7 . I 354* I 2.t I 0)7 5-9a3 57>7 56>g 5454 5 zg7 SoSg 49-2 47)l 45a 43,I 4ItO 38,9 3G56 3454 3 3 I 2928 27>+ 255I ZZ,7 2053 I7zS 1 5nt I 3.s 8 IOn3 727 5,2 2.9642O ., 1/ I 3o6 I 3)6 I 3v4 1 3)3 X 390 f I 25 I 2,2 I I,7 I l3 .. M I 0,5 59>8 s99o 2 57>3 5682 S5n2 54)0 5 3?7 S1eS 5GjI ' 4?z3 4558 44,2 42n5 4o>9 39Xz 37n4 35)6 3337 29,9 27,9 25 39 23 wS 21 ,7 __ I 9>7 17,6 X 3X2 I InO 8s9 7 4eS , 37)S 3IX5 l 29n6 2759 26tI Z wn,4 2 on4^ 1 853 4 12s4 IO53 3 6,3 2>I 2,3 OnQ4IgZ 39n9 38n5 3 7no 35n5 34tI 3 2>5 3 I o 29nA 27 6 26>O 2+gS 22)6 2O,8 18,9 17nI I 5n 3 3,4 9,6 7,8 S>S 389 ZgO 1 59v3 59sS 5953 .f;S?° 58X7 58S4 S8xo 57aS 57n° 5674 55a7 ss 3o .-r i 5423 53X3 s 2n4 5iv4 so, 49)2 +8Xo 46s8 45 nS 44n' 42s7 4£ ts 39>g 36? S 34-'9 3 35;2 , . o3048o ,. 5I56 5 In6 Stn5 5 In3 i ItI sOn8 S°S 505l 49 ,6 49) I 25 47S9 47> 4 45 56 8 4338 41,8. Aoy 3t>+ 37nZ 35 f8 3'+>S 3 3)3 3 I s 8 3<)n4 96Oo l 33?I 332t 33tO 32-X 3238 3256 ,} n t ws, 3X58 3t>5 3 I9I o 3O>7 3OnZ 29.8 Z 7 28tI 27>5 26n$ 26vI 25nA24i6 23X8 233O _ Z2s2 21,3 ZQ+ 9)5 I 8nb I 7$6 5 ;S 3XA I 2)4 1 tn3 IO,2 9a1 699 r w 0 4j6 3n I, s 0,0 t:ReSction in lighe ascexasoll x sect declination Thjs correction is _ orl the cast, arlsl + on the vest side of r:he lueridian. And is to be applted to the sun or star's distance from the neridians obscrved on the cquatorial cilcle.[z]C Tofucep Igt. No I. Table of the Effect of Refraction in North Polar Distance, continued. This correction is aIways +. ' i L V >, s) ) t l re66° ,, 25,5 25,5 25,4 25,4 sSv2 25, I 2+,9 2497 24,5 2+,: 24,0 23,6 23,3 22 s9 22,5 22nI 2In6 ZI,I 2056 20, s I9j5 I 839 18,3 I 7 j7 I7)E I 6,4 I s o7 l5gO I4,3 1 2>7 1 2,0 I I,2 I0,+ 9'5 8s7 7v 7vo 6,2 5O3 4O4 3X5 7 I,8 0,9 Qz0Angle of the vertical with the horary circle. X . . o . 4 6 8 IO I2 IA 16 8 o 2 24 26 8 3o 33 36 38 42 44 46 t 48 o 52 54 5b 60 62 64 66 68 o __ 72 74; 78 z 4 86 88Angle of the verti cal with the horary cil cle. o 90 88 86 84* 83 80 78 76 4 72 7o % 66 64 62 60 58 56 54 SX 0 8 4668° ,, 23sX 23x2 Z 3 X I 2 3 v I 23,0 22,8 22,7 22,5 2-3 22v I 2 I 1 8 2 I Z 5 21,2 20,8 20,5 20,I I9,7 I9S2 I 8,8 18,3 17,8 I7,2 I6n7 I 6, I I5,5 4,9 t493 3I6 3vo I 223 ,6 s,9 I0,2 9n4 8,7 7)9 7,2 6,+ 5,6 4)8 4>o 3,2 2s4 I,6 o,8 o,o7So lB IZ,3 I 2,3 I 2,3 I Zn2 I ssZ 12, 1Z,0 I I39 I 1,8 I I,7 I I,6 I I,+ 1 I,2 I ItI I 0,9 IO,6 IO,4 IO,2 b 9)9 9,7 9>4 9,I 8,8 8, 8,2 7v) 6 7n: 6n9 #6i5 6, 533 5'4 5'0 4}6 4,: 328 3n 3)() 2nG 1 I,7 I , 3 on9 o,+ ,80° IO,2 I 0,2 I0,2 IO,I IO,I I 0 j0 I 090 9'9 9,8 9J7 9,6 9ss 9s3 9,2 9,o 8,8 8,6 8,5 8, 8,o 7v8 7,6 7s3 7,1 6,8 6)6 6,3 6,o 5>7 Sn4 591 4ffi8 4>5 4,1 338 3S 3,1 2,8 2n5 I I , 8 1 oA I , I o>7 o,+ 0J382° J 8,I 8,I 83I 8,1 8,o 8,o 7)9 7n9 7,8 7>6 7,6 7)5 7)4 7)3 t 7,I 7Xo 699 6,7 695 ! 6, 4 6s2 6,o 5,8 5,6 5)4 552 i,0 4,8 5 4X3 4Xo 3,8 3O$ 3)3 3o 298 5 2,2 2>3 27 t>4 I ) I Q>8 0,6 ov3 o,o7oo n 20,9 20,9 20,8 20,8 2ov7 20,l) s°s4 20,3 20nI I9,9 I9,6 I 9SLS I 9,0 I 8,8 I 8>4_ 8,1 7,7 17,3 I 6,9 I 6,5 I 6,Q s5'5 IS/O I435 I4,0 I 3,+ I2)9 IZ,3 I IiZ I l,I I0,4 9,8 9,2 5 7,8 7,1 6,5 5,8 5,I A,3 3,6 2,9 2 1,5 o>7 o,o86° ,, 4to 4) +,o 4to * o 3,9 3X9 3X9 3nS 3,8 3>8 3v7 356 3,6 395 3)5 3v4 3a3 l 3,2 33I6z° 64° il ,, 3°,5 sS>o 3°S 28,o 3°)4 27)9 3°,3 27,X 30,2 27,7 3oc: 27n6 ,8 27)4 29,6 27,2 29>3 26)9 zg,c) s6,6: 28,7 26)3 2893 26so 27,8 ZS,6 ,+ 25,] 26?9 2427 25,+ X432 25n8 23)7 25 3 23 p2 24,7 2s,6 z4,o 22, I s3>4 2 In4 2297 20,8 22,(:> 20, I 21,I 19,4 zov4 1 8)7 I 9s6 I 8,o I 8,8 I7,2 I 7,9 I 5,5 I 7v I I-s,7 I 6,2 I4,8 I 5'3 I4,0 4)3, 13,1 I 3)4 I 2,3 I 2,4 I I 4 I I 4 I ov5 Iot,5 9,6 9n4 8,6 8,+ 7,7 7,4 6,8 6 4 8 5>3 4)9 493 3v9 3,2 2,9 2,2 I ,9 I,I In0 0,0 0,7 2° 74° /1 ,, I 8,7 16,5 I 8,7 I 6,5 I 8d7 I 695 18,6 16,+ sS,5 s6,3 1 8,4 I 6, 2 I8,3 I6,1 I8,I 16,0 I 8,o I 5 ,9 I 7,8 ISn7 I 7,6 l 5)5 17,3 I 5)3 I7,1 1i,I I 6,8 I 4,8 I6Es5 I4j6 I6,Z I+,3 I 5+9 I4,0 I 5eS I 3n7 I5,I T3,3 14,7 I 3to I4,3 I 2,6 I 3X9 I 2)3 -I 3n4 1 I,g I3nO I I,S I2,5 I I,Q I X,o I o,6 I I,4 I0X2 . I I ,v 9v7 lon5 9n2 2,9 8,7 9n3 8,2 Sn8 7,7 8,2 7)2v 7)6 6,7 7)0 6,2 6)+ 5.6 5,6 5,I t 5, I 4>5 4s5 4X° ___ 3n9 334 3,2 2,9 2 ,6 , xv9 i,7 I 3 o>d o,6 , o,o76° 11 I+t4 4,+ I 4+4 I4,3 I4,3 14,2 I4,I I4,0 I 3,8 I 3 7 3n5 3,3 I3,I I 2g9 I2,7 1Z,5 I 2,2 I I ,9 I X ,6 I I n3 I I ,0 10,7 10,+ IO,O 9)O 9)3 8)9 SsS' 8>o yg6 7,2 6,8 6,3 9 5n4 9 4)+ +,o 3+5 3o z?5 2,Q . e l/5 13 OSS 0)O84° 1 6,I 6,I 6,I 6,1 6>o 6,o 650 5)9 9 S,8 5)7 5)7 s,6 5S s?4 5s3 5,2 S,I 4>9 +,8 4)7 4X5 4)4 4)t 4,I 3Z9 3)S 3v6 33+ 3,2 3o 259 zv7 2)5 2,3 I 9 I,7 I,S I,3 I,{ o8 o,. on4 0,2 C>O88° ,, ,o 2, 2so 2n0 2,0 2,0 2n0 I,9 I '9 9 1,9 I s8 I,89Oo onoI , 8 ,7 ,7 ,7 ,6 ,6_ 1 ,5 3,o 1 ,5 2,29 1,+ 3n8 I,4 2,7 1)3 ,6 1,3 2,51 ,2 f 2s3 1J2 ,2 I,I 2, } I ,I 2)0 1 )0 I ,9 0,9 I ,7 °)9 ,6 o,8 I s5 °)7 1 + ^ 0,7 X ,z o,6 1, I os5 I ,0 o,5 . o,8 ,4 o, o3 o^6 o,3 o 4 s) z °) 3 °) X 0)1 0n I O,C) O)04442 4o 38 G 34 32 3C' 28 26 2+ 22 20 I 8 I6 I4138 _E D IO oRefiact;orl in Iight aSCO]IsiOXI) X aeCt declinatiOnO Thi-s sQrrestton ;X. on the east, arld -yorl the vfest side of the me-ridiant[3Jt To fAce p. 122* No I. Table of the Effiect of Refraction in North PoIar Distance, continued. This correction is always +.OEGREES OF ALTITUDE. _ . s A i t Angle of Angle of theverDEGRIZES OF ALTITUDE. the vertical and tical and horary. horal y . ,, . . j _ 0° IO° 20° 30° 4°° 5°° 60° 70CA 8t:) 9O O AS IJ It I} IJ /J J! 11 IW /J W o 8,60 8,47 8,o8 7,45 6,59 5WS3 4>3o 2,94 I)49 0)0 90 zo S47 8v34 7v96 7)34 6,49 5,+5 4+z3 2,9O I 47 oo 8o 2g:) 8o8 7,96 7v60 7,oo 6, I9 5vs0 4X°4 2s77 I>4° °s° 7° a _ r 30 1a45 7v34 6n99 6v+5 5+7 I 4>79 3>72 2>55 I)29 °)° 60 40 6S59 6v49 6)I8 5970 5,og 4)23 3)29 2>26 I)I5 °.s° ;0 5° 5!53 5)44 55I9 4,79 4,Z3 3,55 2>76 I>89 o,g6 oo 40 _ _ _ b , ._ r 6O 4,30 4>23 4>OA 3,72 3+3° 297O 2>IS I>47 o,74 °, 3o 7O 2O94 2)90 2)77 2ESS 2):26 IN89 IJ47 I)OI O}S I 0)0 2O 80 IN49 I)47 I}4° IJ2#9 I>IA 0v95 0)75 QV50 o,z6 o,o IO * ,, . Parallax in right ascension x sect declination This correctiort is + on the tast, and _ on the west side of the meridiaroXE-* a i,o° I O° k /1 {I I 0,0O 9) 8 5 9,85 . 9,70 g,+o 9,ZS 8,66 8n53 7,66 7,54 6,43 6,33 S>O° 4,92 3,42 3,37 I,73 I,7I-f the Equatorial Instr7zmen*.123and fte The horizontal parallax = 8t',6.-This correction is aIways_.The hor;zontal parallax being = loit.This correction is always-*Angle of the ver:ical alld herary. I0 0 3 o 5<> 60 7o 80Angle d the wvertical anA horary.DEGREES 0F ALTITUDE.2O° 3to ,. ,. 9nao 8)66 9,26 8,53 8,83 82I4 8n14 7>5 I 7,20 6,63 6vo4 5,56 Av7° 4j33 3,2 I sn96 I ,63 X s50oo n 7,G6 7n54 7,20 6,64 5,87 +>92 3s83 2>62 l335 <3° 600 11 ,, 6sX 3 5)00 6)33 4)93 6o4 4>7° 5z57 4,33 4>93 3sS3 4,I3 3,zI 3)2 I 2)50 2,20 I s7 I I,I I ,877oQ IJ 3O42 3)37 3,2 I 2,96 2n62 I 1,7I I n I 7 on59goo /l I,73 I 57o I n63 I >So In32 IgI I o,}36 o59 on3o9oo ll olo ovo olo ovo o>o olo olo ono oloo ga 80 7o _8 60 5o 4o 3o 20 I0Parallax iIl right ascension, X sect declinat-ion. This correction is + oll the easts and on the west sick. of the rneridia; Noe IT. Table of the EfFect of Parallax in North Polar Dlstatce..No. IIIw Table of the EXect of Parallax in North Polar Distancet tnd A. 4t-s +xo eZ , i-bb W ' ^Szr GEORGX SEIUCKBURGH $ I#CGOR#t>No. IV. Table of Natural Secants.24tDeg. Nat. * sec, . i , . . . I 6 I o4o3 17 10457 18 I0.5I5 I9 I.0576 20 1 0642 2I I071 I Z2 ; I o7 85 z3 I0864 24 I og46 ZS I I034 __ _ 26 I I I s6 27 x, II223 28 II326 Z9 I I+34 30 I I547 ,iNat. sec. I 0002 I ooo6 IOOI4 I 0024 I0038 _ . I0055 I oo75 a oog8 tOI24 I0154" . I O 1 87 1 0223 I o263 Io306BJat. I)eg. sec. . 0 _ I I 666 46 I I 793 47 I I924 48 I so6z 49 I 2208 50 I23tI 5I I252 I . 52 69° 53 I 2868 54 1 3054 55 "* . ,. I 325° 56 I 3456 57 I3673 58 I 3902 S9 I4142 60 , . .Nat Deg sec. __ I4396 6I I 4 663 625 I 4945 6 3 I 5 243 64 I 5557 65 5 890 ! 66 I 6243 vrt 67 I 6626 68 I70I3 69 I 7434 70 _ ,"_ I 7883 7 I t836l 72 I887I 73 eI94I6 74 20000 75l Nat. sec. 2062 7 2I30I z2027 228I2 23662 24586 25593 26695 279o4 29238 3o7tX 3236I 3-42o3 36280 38637Nat. sec. _ 4I336 44454 48097 S24Q8 57588 63925 7I853 82055 95668 I I4737 . . . 4 3 3 5 I9I07s B 286S37'' 572987 InlqniteLE)eg.. I. 3 6 7 .s .xo I I 13 I4 15Deg. 3 I 3 33a 34 35 \ 36 37 38 39 4o __ 4 4 43 44 45Deg 76 77 78 79 80 _* 8I 8Z 83 84 85 __ 86 87 88 89 9o w50° 60° Sec. Sec. 36,825,3 I8,4 I2,6 I 2,4 8, 5 9'+ 6vs __ 7,6 5,2 6,4 4,4 5,6 3,85v 354 i. 4}5 3,I 4<2.., 2}9 3n9',; 2,7 3>7' 2v5 3,5, 2f,+ 3+4; 2n3 332 2,2 3,2 2,2k S 70° 80oX sec. sec I6,I 8> 8,1 49 5v+. 2v7 4,I 2,I * _ __ 3n3 I ,7 2, 8 I ,+ sn4 I Zo ,> X,2 X,I _ 2, I, I,8 09 I ,7 o,g 1 ,6 C>j8 _ __ __ . . I 95 o,8 I ,5 o,7 X ,4 °i7 I ,+ °i? * of i _af the E:quatorial Instrument. 12S P;o V. Table of the Correction of the Timea sliewn by ali EquatoriWal, o11 Account of Refra-c:tionS when tlae Instrument is not previously adjusted to tlle true Meridian.Angle of the vertical mrith the horary circle,DEGREES 0F ALTITUDE.K IO° Sec. 24l, 1 20, 8I, 6I SOv 42, 36, 33s 3ov 27v 26, 2+, 23, 22,, 21, 2l,25o sec. 94c247 3 I v 8 24, f __ I9^S I6,+ I4,3 I st7 .. .._. I I,8 IO,7 IO,1 9v5 9,1 8,& 8238,23so sec. 6z, 3 I v 20,9 I2,8 IO,g 9)+ 8,4 7,6 7,I 6,6 6,3 _* 6 5,8 5v5 5v4ISO Sec. I6I,3 80,7 54n3 4I, 33n4 28,2 24)4 2 I 8 l9'9 18,3 I7,I i IO,2 > 5)5 * 4>9 1+,3-I4o 5 o IS o 25 3o 45 so 55 60 65 7o 907t Sec. a338, I 69, I I4, 86, 7 59> S I , 46> 4I, 38, 36, 34v 32 3 I n 30? Z9,xOo} Sec. I I 8,9 59)4 4o) 30s4 24,6 2056 I8, I6, }4,6 I3,4 I Z,6 I I,g X I y4 I I, I0,5 3 lO,33oo sec. 74v9 337)4 25v2 I9,I I 5 ) 5 I 3 > I Is I 9,2 8,5 A 7)9 7v5 .. 7,2 6,9 6,6 5Aoo Sec. s I,7 25v9 I7,+ I 3, 2 __ I o>7 g) 7,8 7) , 6,3 5)9 S,5 5,2 __ 49 4,8 4eS S4bso sec, 43)7 2 I ,9 497 I I,2 __ 9,I 7,6 6,6 5)9 . 5n4 5 4)& 4 4nt 4 3S9 3>8x Secant of declination This equatioll is _ on the east) and + on the west side of the meridianF \ }f W ; Ws + -ss : Y j -Cs: X -s IO 15 0 25 3o 35 4o __ 45 50 5§ 60 -65 7o 8o 9o < e ' e#0 -* * * m u s w f fW v f . w w o s -S{r GEORGE SHUCKBURGH S Account126Angle of the vertical with the horary mrcle.bEGREES OF ALTITUDE.t5o r 4ofi I9s8 I3tI 9,6 _W 7,6 6ji A,: __ 3n5 2,9 2ffi+ 21 r,6 I,3 6 o,20° 2928 I4as 9'7 7vZ 5 6 +,5 3>7 3tI e x,8 IeS 1,= o> o os4so t I oug 5aA 5 6 2 I>6 I,3 I>I 0)9 Ojg '. o>7 °,S o+ ov3 0,2 0>5oo 9>2 4Z5 3, 2): In7 ls4 I,I o>3 .. " 0,8 o,6 ojs ov4 .: , I 'I . ; on3 of 3s O,I 02+ X 7O° 8o , { 42 2)3 2} T,l I 3 °)7 I J QU5 o,8 o>4 o,6 o3 o>5 o,3 °sA Q>X * . W. Suu _wC),3 0,2 0,3 012 ,2 0, I 0,3 0} X .__ 0,: 0}I O}I , 0XI % 0} 0w ,.K . v^tQ .#L -, w .3o<3 I8,3 9,I Sig 3)4 2,8 2)3 I,9 ,6 3 1,1 <>,9 o,^R o,6 o>3 o, .o 7 8485 4I v7 27,32Qu1 = I 5,8 I 237 IO,2 8nZ __ 7Z3 6 I 5, J .Iw 3)4 2,7 I,3 0)02-5° 22,9 I I:*4 7v5 5v5 . 4,3 3,+ 3,8 2Z4 2, I,7 4 I,I , _ , ovg on7 ov4 ,IOo 60,3 29v7 19v5 I4,4 I I,4 g>I 7>5 6,2 l 5,2 4)4 3)7 3 2j4 -l 9 c,9 O,3so =r I5o5 7v7 3v7 __ h:: s9 3 v9 I36 __ 3 I,I 9 ,8 |w_w. _ i. o,6 ov5 o,,z o}I 2,6 6Oz 4,I 3j __ . 2,4 I,9 I,6 In3 I,I o59 o,8 o,6 __ Qj5 oj4 0 0)2 O,60° 3 3sI t 2, IeS _ I22 029 O,g o,6 ons on4 o74 oj3 0,2 0>s OnI 0}X Secant of the altitude. Piote. If the observation is on thetwaeSstt}side of the meridian, then is the true mer¢dlan so many minutes to the teaeSStt} of that iund by the instrumentNDo VI Table shewlng the Correctlon of -the Meridian Line found by an Equatorial arising from the Effect Qf ReiactionS in Minutes and 13ecimals. +t_ * tZ< -oJ7the Eqvatorzeal InstrumentsAngle of the vertical wlth the horary circle. -DEGREES OF ALTITUDEF5o sec. 3 >5 6)9 I0>3 I 3,5 I6,6 I gv7 2s,7 35)4 , 3on3 32v4 34vz 35"9 37v 39v I 39a67 I 0° Sec. Sec 2,5 I n8 5tI 3a7 7X6 5,+ I °' 7s 2 __ I 2)3 8)8 I+,6 I0)5 I6X8 I2, I8n6 I3,5 so,7 I4)9 23z5 I 6> I 34 I 7>2 25,3 I8,I _ 26I5 19> 27v5 I 9)7 28)9 20>7 2-9>3 3 I 34<>o t 450 Sec. I Sec. 0,4 o,3 o,8 + 0>7 I,2 ' I 4 t ) l>9 I,6 Z,3 i 1 >9 2,64 2,2 2 9+ Z 4 1. 1 3nx 2a7 3ffi5 229 3>7 3v l 3vi 3n3 .. ... . . .. 4vz 31S +v3 3v5 An5 3)8 4,5 3v83o Sec. 5 X I IOrI I 5 I 9,9 24>5 29> 33>4 37}4 4I 3 44>7 47a7 5on3 *., 52,8 54vt 57,6 58>+ISO Sec. I,2 295 3,6 4,8 5)9 7, 8, 9v9 I on7 I x,5 I2,I __ 12;8 I 3> I I3,.8 I4,Zoo Sec 0,9 I,8 2,7 + 3n5 4v3 2 5'9 6v7 7>3 7X9 8)5 g,g , .. . , . 9n-3957 09 Q IO,335o sec. o27 I,4 I 2,8 3/4 4v I 4v7 5,2 5v7 t5,3 6,7 7 7 ;s4 ^ 7v7 0> 23°° 3SO Sec sec. 0,6 0,5 I, I 0,9 Ia7 I,+ 2,2 I ,9 2)7 2,3 3X3 2'7 3,7 3, I 4v2 3,4 _ __ +>6 3)9 594,I $n3 A,+ 5v7 4n:7soo Sec. ov3 0)5 o,8 IvI _ 1,3 I,7 I,8 I b __ 2,3 5 2)7 2,8 _ -2->9 . 3,2 3,260° Sec. 0,2 on4 o,6 on7 * I , ,9 I j I I,3 I,4 5 I,7 I«8 In9 .... .... 2, 2,I 222 . X,:7Oo secX O, I 0}3 0,+ o>5 __ o,6 on7 o,8 o,g an I I,I I,I I,3 I,3 In3 1,4 In480 Sec 0v1. O,I 0)s 0): _} on3^ on3 on4 o>4 . . . 1 . O>s OJ5 5 f ,c>. _, o,6 ov6 ox7 o>7s o 15 20 25 3o 35 45 o SS 6o 65 7 o 9Q-+9 5 v I 3 5,4S:)9 6, I 6,5 6)5x Secant of declirlattolzc This correctLon is+_ cn the east arld + orl the west side of the meridian.No. VII Table of the Eff<ect of Refraction in Right As cension in TitneS when the Equatorial is adjusted to the Meridiane o # wwf t t| r 3° 5° 7°IO° IS° 20 25° 3°° 350 4°° 4S 5°° 60° 700 So° , O / /y #, // t //, // / At / /l { X/ / i A {/ If # I4 36 9 547 jo-S t5 3 3t 2 35 2 2I 38 I 2.II 8 s7 48 33 2I I0 I0 4 24 9 46 7 IA 5 II-3 27 2 322 I 37 I 2-o. 7 57 4.8 33 2I I0 2° 3 39 9 I66 524 i63 I7 2 26 I 55 I 32 I I6t 4 53 45 3I 20 9 2& I3 I2 8 5916 384 4Sw3 I0 2 20I 50 I 29 I I+1 2 52 44 30 I9 9 P ,,. . _ . . , -l . , . . .. . Z ,. ' _ 30 I2 35 8 3316 204 32t3 In2 14 I 45 I 25I I0 59 49 42 29 I8 9 35 II 55 8 66 + It2 52 2 7 I 40 I ZOI 6 56 46 39 27 I7 8 4 I 7 35 5 37 4 I-2 40aI S9 I 33 I 5 I Z 52 43 37 25 I6 8 45 I0 I9 7 5 tI 3 ^43!.2 28 I 50t 26I 9 581 48 4° 34 23 15 7 ., . _ w S . ., ..................... _ , ................................... i5° g 22 6 2I 4 42 3 222 5 I 40 I I8I 3 52 44 36 3I 2I I4 6 55 8 2I 5 404 I23 2 1 29 I 10 56 46 39 33 27 I9 I2 6 60 7 I6 + 563 39 2 37 I 45 I I8I I 49 40 34 29 24 I6 II 5 65 6 7 4 913 43 I2I 28 I 5 SI AI 34 28 24 20 I4 9 4 7 4 5S 3 ==1: 3& +91 Jo 53 42 33 :8 23 I9 I6 11 7 3 75 3 45 2 34 I 54 I 2I 54 40 32 25 2I I8 IS I2 9 6 .s 80 2 32 I 43I I6 55 37 27 2I I7 14 I2 I0 8 6 4 2 g5 I x6 52; 38 27 I8 I3 II 9 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 , .,t,! #, y 8 ,, ,# #,8s } K s} + +^8Sir GEORGE SHUCEDURGH?S Accoutat, SGAngle of the sertlcaI 5>rith the horary K .cirtle.SIDEGREES OF ALTITUDE.Nd. VI IT. Tabie o:f e Effect of 3lefiraction in Declinatiatls mrherl the Equatorial is atusted to the WIeridian@ QAL4l25, ex<-<) 79 fEw ' Dx iPhzZo. Zrarns. MDCCXCE . 3ab. rx . p. 1 2 8.29RosLS-= 32 33 X/S'\') t x lui -, a, bmxi ,Jw ! . WXXFJRSE m7WAvo l I lX/S:on SG63623-mXBV Ir tyvW EStTH,reS>JPgH,; y$zzyrXT7XXFJRSE22 -u ¢ h 2] | -Ls_ s47 X$ 7rw tvrXWEC T0 -xDhe70s.Dra. MDCCXCIII. Wab. X.w. }98.fJnt ird &e zzf ,of thr OrggenaZ.' aal rt cAgB /4AA 1 %EBBw -'wd g b s s a {9<ze hvfif Jc .vtze gf' tAe Orr,z7zczZ at A_ 1,.Z1X,0t1,lt j } | i L L , , , J 1I ...,, . I ....'_1PhzZos.Trvezs. MDCCXCIII. zzb. Xl.fl.>28.A| f x ew S y 9vScate of Etefy . o S f f ; I Z a Y 4 o N 8J d =Df :: i _ i .: F _ g: % _ _ = _ _ _ _ _ _ : _ r_ __ _ g , 5F-L = S f t_ . _ f . Wr . _: 1_ gL _ = _ [ E /, . k _ b _F ,_= : _ e : -. . v " e __ t Xt ._ k ,X __ _ _ _ , , _ ,,,4. _ < _ i < [__G r . a . . . ; -KA;-: t t = o ==S { :: : :0 . . J _ : = B :. . _ p F; ;a@,Si^ A,Xp @-<n,--tE=F (X -e -@ > sk .4. . p@/ At//At{/2rt-/t ,. {,, L-==v-q > @ { :D --=S 7 -o L =g < _ A .................................................. ............................................................. s ............................................... S= _ t B _ I _ I s_ __ . . ,=)%y2 @ /XH22to D r-X -L -A PhS.Eran.MDCCXCIE. Iwab. XAr p./s.t /. W 0//itK/ttvJ{zR 17 ' | / C s/2 @ /XH22tRszzAS) , 9 o . -' !BX < X \ A _. _ . S $ . _ , I I i _ 